---
layout: post
title:  "Episode 009: Paul Dehaye"
date:   2016-12-05
excerpt: "Paul Dehaye is a mathematician recently with the University of Zurich."
episode: true
tag:
- MOOCs
- privacy
- online education
comments: true
---

In this episode, we feature an interview with mathematician Paul Dehaye.  Dehaye is known as the instructor of a 2014 massive open online course (MOOC) about massive open online courses that was mysteriously cancelled one week in.  Dehaye is interviewed by John Sloop, Vanderbilt’s Associate Provost for Digital Learning, who met Dehaye at an Open edX conference last summer.  Dehaye shares his perspective on that 2014 incident, and he comments on the role of for-profit companies in higher education, the future of online education, and the still untapped potential of MOOCs.

Links:

* [Paul Dehaye's website](http://paulolivier.dehaye.org/)
* [Paul Dehaye's faculty page](http://user.math.uzh.ch/dehaye/)
* [@podehaye](https://twitter.com/podehaye) on Twitter
* ["The Mystery of the Missing MOOC"](https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2014/07/08/massiveteaching-mystery-captivates-confuses) on Inside Higher Ed, July 8, 2014
* [Paul Dehaye's July 4, 2014, blog post about #MassiveTeaching](https://old.etherpad-mozilla.org/pr8ZtLXODg)
* [George Siemens' July 9, 2014, blog post about #MassiveTeaching](http://www.elearnspace.org/blog/2014/07/09/congrats-to-paul-olivier-dehaye-massiveteaching/)
* "[MOOC Platforms, Surveillance, and Control](https://www.aaup.org/article/mooc-platforms-surveillance-and-control#.WEc-iX1vncg)," Paul Dehaye's essay in the Sept-Oct 2016 issue of Academe

<iframe width="100%" height="450" scrolling="no" frameborder="no" src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/295887666&amp;auto_play=false&amp;hide_related=false&amp;show_comments=true&amp;show_user=true&amp;show_reposts=false&amp;visual=true"></iframe>

## Episode 9: Paul Dehaye

00:00 background music

**Derek Bruff**:  00:09 Welcome to "Leading Lines," a podcast for
Vanderbilt University. I'm your host, Derek Bruff, Director of the
Vanderbilt Center for Teaching. Leading Lines is produced by the Center
for Teaching, the Vanderbilt Institute for Digital Learning, the Office
of Scholarly Communications, and the Office of the Associate Provost for
Digital Learning. One of the benefits of producing this podcast across a
number of groups here at Vanderbilt is that we're casting a wide net for
interview subjects.

00:29 In this episode we feature an interview with someone I
probably wouldn't have picked for this podcast, but my colleague, John
Sloop, Associate Provost for Digital Learning here at Vanderbilt, met
Paul Dehaye at a conference earlier this year and found Dehaye's
perspective on higher education fascinating.

00:46 John really wanted to interview Dehaye for the podcast. I
wasn't thrilled with the idea, but I respect John a lot and I wanted to
keep an open mind. See, I know Paul Dehaye as the instructor of a
massive open online course, or MOOC, about massive open online courses,
who, back in 2014, deleted his entire course one week in. The first week
of the course, which was called Teaching Goes Massive: New Skills
Required, ran like any other MOOC with some videos from Dehaye, active
discussion boards and so on.

01:17 After a week, however, everything in the course vanished, the
videos, the discussion boards, all the student posts, everything. Dehaye
went radio silent, no word from him on his blog, on Twitter, through the
course platform. It was several days before he posted something of an
explanation.

01:33 Reading his explanation back at the time, it seemed to me that
Dehaye had deleted his course as a cross between a publicity stunt and a
public art project. I gathered he wanted to get a few thousand people
active in his MOOC, then pull the plug to make the point that when we
participate in online, supposedly free courses, we don't control our
experience or our data.

01:52 The vendors like Coursera, who hosted his MOOC, are the ones
who control all that. Those discussion forum posts that all his students
wrote, that intellectual work was gone as a way to prove his point.

02:03 I didn't think the stunt was very respectful to the hundreds
of students who enrolled in his course, and Dehaye's public statements,
including those made on Twitter, didn't reassure me of his intentions.
So when John Sloop brought his name up as a possible podcast interview,
I was rather skeptical, but as I said, I wanted to be open minded.

02:21 What follows is John's interview with Paul Dehaye, conducted
this past summer. It's definitely interesting, and it makes clear that
there was more to the story of Dehaye's MOOC experiment, back in 2014,
than what I heard or understood. It also provides a little behind the
scene's perspective on some of the MOOC mania of years past.

02:39 Dehaye raises some important questions about the future of
online education, and the still untapped potential of MOOCs.

02:47 background music

**John Sloop**:  02:47 So we're here today with Paul Dehaye, who, at
the time of the broadcast, of this podcast, we first put out, would be a
scientific collaborator, working on a computer science mathematics
research project for the European Commission. He will be based, as he
has been for a while, at the University of Zurich's Mathematics
Department. How are you? We'll start off with just a hello. How are you,
Paul?

**Paul Dehaye**:  03:14 I'm doing very good, thanks. I'm glad to be
here.

**John**:  03:17 Yeah, I'm happy to have you joining me. I met Paul
first at a conference, a while back, dealing with Open edX, and issues
with Open edX, but I had known you before then because of some of your
fame, notoriety, I don't know which word would be better, caused by a
MOOC that you had run on Coursera.

03:44 Let me give a little summary because the story is a bit
confusing still, if you try to read about it on the Internet, and I
wanted to hear a little bit about your thoughts on that.

03:55 You first came in to my attention, and to a lot of people's
attention, outside of the mathematics world for a course on Coursera
called Teaching Goes Massive: New Skills Required. Inside higher ed,
described this as a MOOC for those skeptical of MOOCs.

04:11 After a week, this is my understanding of the events as they
unfolded. After a week, the course disappeared, and then it reappeared
with no content, without answers, etc. You twitted to your students.
Students reflect on the fact that a technology company has now
effectively replaced your teacher, saying that you were removed from the
massive teaching course.

04:33 Then there's a great deal of confusion in the online stories
about this. Now, I don't know how confusing it was at the time for you
or your students. Coursera comes out and apologize and said they were
trying to complete the course, you claimed that you were still on the
course, but it removed content, and it goes on and on. Then it appears
as if this was an experiment to let students understand how Coursera
works, what universities do, etc.

05:02 One of the students wrote that you appeared to be conducting a
social media MOOC experiment. Later, you wrote on MoPad the goal of this
experiment you wrote was to confuse everyone, including the university,
Coursera, the Twitter world, as many journalists as I can and the course
participants, the goal being to attract publicity. I want to show how
Coursera tracts you, end quote.

05:23 I know that came down. After this happened, George Simmons
wrote a blog post. It was a congratulations post, but mixed reviews. He
seemed to be a little confused even about what was the overall purpose
or goal.

05:38 Now, talking to you today and reflecting on it, can you tell
me a little bit about what you were up to and if you felt like you were
successful raising the issues that you wanted to raise?

**Paul**:  05:49 Just one thing, there's one quote you raised, the
goal of this experiment was too confused and so on. I didn't technically
say that. That's a quote that appears inside higher ed. I've tried to
get them to correct it, but they won't correct it. I said something very
similar, but not that.

06:10 The goal of removing the content was to get students to think
first, also attract attention, indeed. Because at the moment I removed
the content of the course, I was extremely confused about Coursera's
data practices. I couldn't get any straight answer from them. Also, it
seemed to me like they were not ready to respect European privacy laws.

06:37 That was my understanding at the time, but it was an extremely
confusing time for me and there are still many parts of this that are
confusing to me. I've tried to get clarification from Coursera or my
university and it has been very difficult. There are still many things
that are completely unclear.

06:57 In particular how my course was suspended, who made the
decision to delete some of my posts, or to silent‑ban my account.
Silent‑banning means that to me it appears as if I am posting, but to
the others they just never see anything. Effectively like having my
tongue cut.

07:24 The reason I was trying to confuse people and I felt my only
way out of this MOOC was that I had little support around me. I had
signed a lot of contracts that were very binding, in terms of what I
could say and what I couldn't say about Coursera, about the contracts I
had signed themselves, about the data policies of Coursera, all those
things.

07:50 For better or worse, that's the strategy I adopted, expecting
that later on I would be able to clarify once some information bubbled
up. That never actually happened or actually happened much, much, much
later because there were all kinds of legal issues thrown in.

08:13 There was a disciplinary inquiry by my university that
physically required me to not say anything. That's why I didn't answer
journalists at the time, when they were investigating. That was in June
2014, by the way. June, July. It was later clarified, I feel, in the
press in Europe. In Germany and Switzerland, to some extent, also in the
French‑speaking press in Switzerland. It has never made it back to the
US.

**Derek**:  08:46 If it has, it has not made it back in a way that's
very easy to find. A quick sleuthing on Google, etc., really brings up
the same stories from 2014.

**Paul**:  08:59 Right. That's another big problem in terms of...my
whole stance on this is very proactive with regards to data, and how it
can affect people, and stuff from your past. That's exactly an example
of it.

09:16 Some incident happened in my professional past, some hot take
was written on it within a couple weeks where it's very unclear what's
going on, there is a misquote in higher ed that drives a lot of coverage
at the time, and misleads a lot of people. Then, eventually, that's the
settled fact, if you want, of a Google search on my name.

09:41 If you look, there is five or six newspaper articles that have
been written since in the biggest newspapers in Germany, I think the
three biggest, and that doesn't bubble up of course. It's in German. The
fact that I deleted my course was not planned. There were other parts of
the course that were planned as experiments.

10:01 That's why this conflation of quotes is very confusing to lots
of people that are trying to understand what's going on. There were
other experiments that were completely announced to students as such.
The course was completely experimental. I was completely open with
students about that.

10:21 I saw a lot of parallels with another incident that happened
at the same time in that weekend at the end of my first week of the
MOOC, which was this Facebook emotion study, where Facebook actively
manipulated users to try to make some of them sad and some of them
happy.

10:40 It turns out that Coursera is also in certain ways
manipulating courses, manipulating instructors, manipulating contents if
you want, in ways that they can do because of their central location in
this whole ecosystem. One has to be aware of those things and think
through the consequences long term for education in general.

**John**:  11:05 That likely brings us in a way to a new article
that you have coming out in Academe. If we could, I'd like to talk about
that for just a second. Here's what I want to do, you have an article
coming out in Academe on MOOC Surveillance and Control.

11:23 What I'm going to do is quote your conclusion and then ask you
to tell us a little about what you're arguing and how you get there,
because it's a pretty interesting conclusion, it's pretty forceful.

11:36 Here's what you say, "In the end, we risk being collectively
complicit in an unconditional intellectual surrender to venture
capital‑funded educational disruption. Indeed, we risk directly
contributing to the numbing effects of constant and indiscriminate
surveillance. As professors, we should always insist that education
remains emancipating and should resist the coercive logic of
surveillance capitalism."

12:05 Ending the quote there, so I like to hear a little bit about
what you're saying here. Most professors would agree with that last
line, "We should always insist that education remain emancipating."

12:15 My take, I'm reading you is that, some of us, some faculty
are...may think that what they're doing is emancipating, but in fact
they're working with them what you called the course of logic of
surveillance capitalism. Can you tell me a little bit about what you're
overall argument is?

**Paul**:  12:35 There's no doubt that bringing education to the
masses is a great goal and it's extremely emancipating. The question is
how exactly to them and what are the consequences medium term. How is
this short term logic of bringing a course to a mass of people affecting
things five years down the road?

12:57 What I explained in the article is the mechanics of how MOOCs
can evolve and suddenly not seem as ideal as they par when you start
them. We can talk about that logic or that mechanics but MOOCs are
collecting a lot of data and this data has to be monetized some way
eventually.

13:22 I mean, you can think that they will always make money of the
certificate, but that's not the logic of Venture Capital. The logic of
Venture Capital is that you should have returns on your investments that
are huge, that are 10, 20 fold as much as possible. If there is money to
be made from the data, there will be money made from the data, that's
it.

13:45 One of the things that is anticipate by Coursera contract, one
of the monetization strategies that have been added in a bunch of
contract probably also with Vanderbilt and other universities, is
transcript services. With the consent of the user, with the consent of
the student, Coursera can start building a transcript service. Some
service that will certify, "Yes, this student has this degree."

14:15 Now, that's starting to look very much like a digital rights
management system, a DRM system to me. You don't own your songs anymore.
You don't own your old records. You start renting them from Apple, and
Apple constantly monetizes on that.

14:30 That's an example of a very...a danger to me, is the fact that
suddenly students would not own their degrees anymore. They wouldn't be
able to go to the Vanderbilt office, pay a small fee, and then they get
a copy of their degree, but they would have to constantly pay to be
listed in some global search engines for skills.

14:54 That's potentially very problematic. Of course the employers
would be happy. You have a company that's needs to relocate or to
find...to build a new extension somewhere. They need to find locals that
have lots of skills, it's a very specific skills, there you go. You find
them right away.

15:14 You can see a whole host of data certifying that those
students have the skills. Most likely in other locations have taken the
same courses, it's very easy to make sure that they have the same level.
The employers are happy, but the students might not be so happy because
they have to constantly pay to be listed there, or someone has to pay
there and a lot of money is extracted from that.

15:43 That's one possible future. Of course, it's very pessimistic.
I realize that view is very pessimistic, but I'm hopeful that others
hear that and anticipate it and react to it. It doesn't need to happen.
If others see a danger, then we'll react collectively and build other
solutions.

**John**:  16:05 Your fundamental statement, your starting point is
undeniable. Platforms for MOOCs don't exist outside of an economic
system. They have to have either Venture Capital or they have to operate
on capital on some other way. It operates on a very different system,
the Coursera, but it also has to have money coming into it.

16:26 There have to be ways of creating revenue streams and I
understand the direction you're pouring into in terms of monetizing it,
does take a stand and a path with...it could be problematic. What I'm
seeing more and more of as we're going forward, are more and more ways
of attempting to credentialize the material and ways that are
articulating to you...to the universities themselves.

16:57 That might be a more positive way of going about this, so that
if a university gives the credential rather than the credential coming
through Coursera, one of your fears may be less likely realized, that
way they come back to Vanderbilt, or to Zurich, or whoever to get their
credentials. That might be a little different. There's still going to be
some...there's still problems to think through etc.

**Paul**:  17:21 Do you think so? Coursera has all the data. They
could start just delivering an alternate certificate. They could just
make it linkable with LinkedIn or with other employers, monster.com,
Amazon, whatever you want. Amazon web services, Amazon Mechanical Turk.
Suddenly you have Turkers.

17:44 I don't know if you know what Mechanical Turk is. It's a
platform that's built originally by Amazon where people can do very,
very basic tasks that are difficult for computers but easy for humans.
All kind of classification. It's often used as source of training data
for artificial intelligence models. You can link the two. You can link
Mechanical Turk with some form of degree that has been certified somehow
by real instructors.

18:21 There's nothing really to prevent Coursera from building that.
That's in the system. That's in the logic of the contracts that the
universities have signed. I'm sure Vanderbilt will not build something
like that. If Coursera thinks there is value there to construct it, they
will.

**John**:  18:45 Every university, I'm sure, has a legal counsel
look over these contracts, but because MOOCs has been a relatively new
phenomenon, there are implications, I'm sure, in the legal contracts,
that most of us haven't even thought through yet. Just because we
couldn't.

**Paul**:  18:59 They might have. Let me tell you my experience. I
complained about some aspects of the contracts of the Zurich local
regulator. The result is, for a while, and possibly still, the
University of Zurich hasn't been using Coursera, because it's not
legally compliant with local laws. Another university in Switzerland,
which I won't name, has renegotiated their contract. Because they've
realized there were a lot of problems there.

19:26 A lot of those contracts were rushed extremely fast, two or
three years ago. I'm quite convinced legal issues were not the forefront
concerns. A lot of people were concerned at the time with copyright.
They really wanted to retain copyright over the courses, and just grant
a license for Coursera to use the content, but keep the freedom to use
it on other platforms.

19:59 Universities have been burned with all the scientific
publishing and understand those issues now, but here there's a whole
host of other issues, because the content they're offering is being
interacted by a lot of people. So they're creating a lot of very useful
data around that content, that can be very, very interesting.

20:20 Here is another example. The translations are crowdsourced.
The translations is derivative work that belongs to Coursera, even
though it's made by lots of individual students, who are grateful to the
universities, producing the content originally, but the translations
belong to Coursera, at least in all the contracts I've seen.

**John**:  20:44 I'm assuming a lot of universities have negotiated
differences in some of the contracts. What you're saying is that the
majority of the contracts at base allow the translations to be owned by
Coursera. Is that correct?

**Paul**:  21:01 Yes. Yes. An analogy I'm thinking of, and that I
find very useful...I think it will resonate with your own background.
I'm picturing we're in 1996, or something like that, at the "New York
Times." There's this Internet. We have a lot of very valuable content.
We pay journalists to go all over the world. We pay professors to learn
at the best universities. Then they produce content, and that content is
useful to lots of people, but we don't know how to monetize it, so let's
just put it on the web for free.

21:38 That's essentially what the university has been doing, and
what newspapers did 20 years ago. The result is, the newspapers
contributed to build a whole ecosystem around online advertising.
Programmatic advertising, that survives on a lot of tracking of
individuals.

21:59 Now the best solutions newspapers have is to ally with
Facebook, and distribute their content on Facebook, to try to get a cut
of the revenue, but they're just being cannibalized completely by those
centralized platforms. It's absolutely terrible what happened over 20
years in journalism. That happened, because there are those software
mediator between the reader and the journalist. We're building exactly
the same. We're building platform intermediaries between students and
teachers or universities.

**John**:  22:38 That analogy actually I think everyone is going to
find very compelling. It makes a lot of sense to trace it back that way,
and think about us going forward. I want to move on a little bit to talk
about platforms. You use Coursera as an example quite often, and
Coursera is the largest platform provider for most English speaking
universities, as I understand. We also have other options.

23:02 I met you at an open edX conference, which is an open source
version of edX. EdX would also be an option for some universities as a
platform. What do you see as the differences between these? I want to
put you in the role of the overseer for a university. A chancellor, etc.
You're faced with MOOCs. The question of MOOCs, or putting content
online.

23:26 How would you choose amongst those type of platforms, or would
you choose not to go in that direction at all? What would you choose to
do?

**Paul**:  23:36 Putting in as the choice of the provost or the
chancellor is already affecting the decisions very much, because then
that person has to decide, based on something that will work for
everyone. Ease of use becomes extremely important. Ease of deployment
becomes extremely important. So they will go for the easiest solution.

23:59 That's where there's most support, and that's exactly what
Coursera tries to answer. I don't think it should be a decision of the
provost. If a professor wants to use another platform, they should be
encouraged just as much as the other professors. Also, if it's taught as
a solution that a provost has to come up with on their own, it's pretty
restrictive as well. You know a lot of other professors in similar
positions at other universities.

24:33 I'm sure there are alliances of universities, just as there
are in Europe. Why not build communal solutions that we own. That we own
really. Joint ventures between, I don't know, Nashville, Vanderbilt, and
your favorite other university around, that you collaborate with on a
lot of other issues. Then offer the possibility to your professors to
host courses there, if you want to. Do the advertising jointly and save
money that way.

25:03 All those things. That's really possible, but I'm not entirely
sure that many provosts think it's possible.

**John**:  25:11 What I would do, is take it away from...I
understand what you're...I like the way you're answering the question.
You're talking about a structural position, but if you were making the
choice, from your position...you're saying, there are other creative
ways of doing this. Using open source, or using other types of
platforms, making coalitions that are outside of that other structure.

25:33 That's the direction you would prefer as a faculty member, as
a person who's doing that.

**Paul**:  25:39 Yeah. It would be a lot to reach out, too. Because
if you're a provost, pick up your phone and call another provost. Try to
see if you can build something together. Two, three, ten different
universities together. It will be extremely interesting, because then
you will really be able to freely collaborate, away from a lot of issues
that have to do with privacy, and all those things. You really are in
control, and more things are allowed to you, to do.

26:08 You can do a course in one place, and share the data with
another. You can do joint courses. You're free from a lot of the
shackles that would come from a centralized platform. That would be my
impression.

**John**:  26:23 Just to make sure we're clear on this while we're
talking about it, you don't have a problem with MOOCs or online
education in general. You have a problem with the way in which platforms
have used data. The contracts between professors and universities, and
an entity like Coursera. Theoretically the idea of online content
doesn't bother you?

**Paul**:  26:47 No, not at all. On the contrary. I got into this
mess, if you want, because I was really curious about what was possible
with MOOCs. I still feel the area is completely under‑explored, which is
barely touching at the possibilities. You know probably of this movement
called Citizen Science, where you try to push science into the hands of
citizens.

27:16 You can try to find people to collect data. To think through
solutions, and all these things. Put different skills together, by just
having the largest coverage you can. MOOCs can definitely help there. If
you can teach a MOOC and simultaneously do a Citizen Science research
project, that works perfectly together. That's one example of things
that will happen down the road, I'm convinced.

27:44 It's already sort of happening in a few places, but there
needs to be more of it. This offers fantastic opportunities. Imagine,
you train people to collect data around that. You train 1,000 people all
over the world. Those people will start interviewing or collecting data,
whatever, about their local neighborhoods. This contributes to a
research project.

28:09 It raises a whole host of other issues, about quality of data
etc., but it's a fantastic opportunity, I would find.

**John**:  28:20 Something just occurred to me, and I don't know if
you have any comment on this or not. It's not about MOOCs. It's not
really about education. It's about centralization of information.

28:32 Pokemon Go, big craze. Everyone's doing it. I've got all sorts
of friends out every weekend, the last couple of weekends. My child out
of the house, I don't have the impetus to do this myself, then I read
online a lot of concern about how much information you're turning on to
Pokemon Go when you participate. Do you have any thoughts on this?

**Paul**:  29:02 Yes. I have a lot of thoughts. My thoughts align
most with what Oliver Stone said recently. He recently came out with
himself saying this was an instance of surveillance capitalism. Exactly
the same terms that appeared in my piece on Academe. I think it is. I
think it is. It's a commodification of one aspect of life, by big
corporations, by centralizing and collecting a lot of data. It's how you
play, how you interact with your local world around you.

29:37 It's trying to map that out. It's trying to map your
interactions with that world. And more insidious, it's trying to alter
that. Now you start to see stores that pay for Lures, so they can
attract gamers around those Lures. You can use this augmented reality to
start to shape the reality around you. Obviously potentially a good
thing, but it's also potentially a bad thing. Who controls this, should
be the real question.

**John**:  30:10 laughs That always should be the real question.
It's, I don't want to say humorous. It really is interesting. We all
grew up in a world where we were warned through things like "Brave New
World" etc., that the technologies were going to be...we weren't going
to pursue that. We would never put ourselves under surveillance, just
for its own sake, but that we would be seduced by fun, pleasures etc.

30:39 In a certain sense that's exactly what's happening, but we
don't do anything about it, because we want to be a part of a community
doing the same sorts of fun things.

30:49 Even with all the warnings we've grown with up, we seemed to
embrace it without a whole lot of thought. We need people like you of
course to remind us, but it is, it's interesting to me. Everyone you
talked to about this will say, "Yeah, I get that but I'm not seeing any
ill effects right now and this is fun and my kids want to do it."

**Paul**:  31:12 People warning about those things there are lots of
them, but what is missing, is people coming with convincing evidence of
dangers. There is a reason that they are not coming with that. The
reason is that it's very hard to collect that. It's very hard to
actually have proof of those things.

31:32 If you were at the platform and your goal was to uncover
evidence of the danger associated to the platform, you could but you're
not, and you don't have access to a lot of the data there. It becomes a
lot more difficult.

31:49 Let me give you an example, lots of people are talking about a
filter bubble. The fact that you see your Facebook news feed is tailored
for you. It's showing you things that you want because that's what keeps
you on Facebook.

32:02 While lots of people are claiming that this is having an
effect on political discourse in the US with all the consequences that
everyone can see, but that's just words. It's hard to prove. It's hard
technically to get into thousands of people's news feed and see how they
interact with it. It's very hard unless you're on Facebook.

32:25 If you're a Facebook engineer working at Facebook, you could
do it, but the thing is you're optimizing for other metrics which is
engagement of the users with the content and all those things. It's not
Facebook's priority to make sure that it's having a positive effect on
society overall. It's Facebook's goal to make sure they have revenue
that they can show to their shareholders and all those things.

**John**:  32:50 But more than that, the argument about the filter
bubble, an argument that it was made earlier inaudible made it in
terms of cascading new sources and how we broke ourselves off from
others, etc. We do that ourselves through our choices because we have
multiples choices and now Facebook makes it even more pronounced.

33:13 I agree with you, but even if we could show, even if a
Facebook engineer would come forward and show us exactly how that takes
place, the step between saying "Yes, that takes place", and "That has
lead to a problematic political culture", still has one step removed.
You still have a hard time convincing people of that.

33:30 Some people would say, "That's not what the problem is, it's
over determined. There are multiple other causes." Making that
argument...I guess what I'm doing is I'm agreeing with you. It's very
difficult to make that argument both because some of it is hidden from
us.

33:46 It's not the purpose of Facebook to make that argument for us,
but secondly, these are complex issues we're dealing with. Ideology is
always complex. Making the link from one step to another, people don't
want to buy it. They don't want to think that about themselves. They
don't want to think that, "I've filtered myself so far off that I'd
become part of this dynamic."

**Paul**:  34:06 Sure. Ideology is very complex but it happens in
all kinds of circumstances. It's over‑discriminatory, maybe
involuntarily because people don't...drivers don't go to poor
neighborhoods to collect riders. They don't go around there.

34:25 That's not ideology; it's just a practical consequences of
people's biases. Same thing with Airbnb, is it harder to rent something
if you're of a different ethnic of origin than the majority? It's going
to be very hard to prove if you are not...if you don't own the data, if
you don't control the data and what's done with it. That's my take.

34:49 Even if you do, even if you...if you have a convincing
argument based on data or based on social audits or things like that,
the central platform can always present a different picture and control
it. For instance, that happened with the filter bubble.

35:08 Facebook did its own study on the filter bubble and came up
with its own conclusion, all kinds of people attack the conclusions, but
they don't have access to the raw data or anything to counter the
argument. Now, there is this Facebook filter bubble paper that sort of
says, "Well, the filter bubble is not as worse as individual's own
biases."

35:31 That might not be the most interesting question and anyway you
can't retest it. You can't reproduce the experiment. You can't do all
kinds of...

**John**:  35:39 Because we have no access to that data.

**Paul**:  35:41 Right and to go back to education, Coursera makes a
similar claims. At a partner conference, Coursera made a claim to
professors, and provosts, and all those things that the quality of
translations obtained by crowd sourcing was higher than the quality
obtained...or equivalent to the quality obtained by professional
translators at a much lower cost, of course.

36:08 That claim ended up on Twitter, but once it's on Twitter
it's...you take a screenshot and then it can re‑circulate. It somehow
landed into the whole translating community where a lot of people
actually volunteer their time on Coursera to translate courses, because
they agree with the general goal of spreading education.

36:28 They were pretty upset because they were spending their own
leisure time translating for free, even though there were professional
translators, just to see a result that would say, "The translations are
just as good." That's a claim that's completely no academic indulgence,
as far as I know, asks for the data but I asked remotely and it was
never given.

**John**:  36:55 Because that data is...you don't have access to it.
It's valuable data, correct?

**Paul**:  37:01 Right. It's valuable or it's at least...the fact
that they own it, it means they can say whatever they want. I don't know
if they've done an actual study to see the quality of the translations,
but they've claimed it was the same quality.

**John**:  37:15 I'm going to switch gears a little bit. There's a
question we're asking every person and this is going to take you outside
of the digital realm. In terms of educations, what is your favorite
non‑digital education technology?

**Paul**:  37:33 I'm a mathematician, so I have to say chalk.

**John**:  37:36 laughs That's because you're a mathematician,
right?

**Paul**:  37:39 Right. Chalk and blackboard. It has a completely
different feel to any kind of other tool you could use to make a
presentation. It's much more physical to actually write with chalk on a
board. It feels very manual and very ancient to know that thousands of
years ago people were doing the same. It's great to write with a
chalkboard.

**John**:  38:06 I talked to mathematicians at Vanderbilt about this
quite a bit when we were...a couple of years back, we were...some of
their buildings, their classrooms are being refurbished, and they
insisted on not whiteboards, not markers but on chalkboards. It's going
to be the only building on campus with chalkboards.

**Paul**:  38:24 Yeah. That's the same at many, many university.

**John**:  38:26 Yeah. Is that about the tie to a tradition? The
difference between a whiteboard and a chalkboard gets lost on me, what
do you think the...is it just the inaudible of it? What is that?

**Paul**:  38:41 There is some aspect of that. I mean, it's like
asking a smoker what's the difference between a cigarette and a nicotine
patch. There is something about fiddling with your fingers that way, but
also it feels more practical. It just does. It has a tone, a ring to it.
I mean sound is associate to the chalkboard.

**John**:  39:08 I like that. I like the analogy. The tobacco
analogy is probably one that won't resonate with everyone because
there's a lot of non‑tobacco users, but we're talking about the delivery
system for nicotine, but it's very, very different for each person which
one is the one that they want to embrace.

39:24 Telling somebody who's quit smoking that they could switch to
dipping is not likely to work because that's not where they're taking
their pleasure, so I like that.

39:32 You're looking forward to your article coming out in Academe,
which issue will that be coming out? When will that be making its debut?

**Paul**:  39:38 The next month, September or October.

**John**:  39:42 All right. I appreciate you joining me today.

**Paul**:  39:46 Sure. Thanks for inviting me.

39:47 background music

**John**:  39:47 Thanks.

**Derek**:  39:50 That was mathematician Paul Dehaye, interviewed by
Vanderbilt's Associate Provost for Digital Learning, John Sloop. I'll
second, Dehaye's recommendation of chalk. I'm part of the Math
Department that John Sloop mentioned and I'm happy that we've kept
chalkboards on most of our classrooms.

40:04 It's not just the tactile quality of chalks that I like. I
appreciate the line quality it enables. Draw and erase markers tend to
make lines that are all the same thickness. The chalk it can vary the
line thickness for aesthetic effect. As our guest, Zoe LeBlanc mentioned
in our last episode, aesthetics matter.

40:20 A quick word on MOOCs, we spent a fair amount of time
discussing the past, present, and future of MOOCs in this podcast and
there are two minds about that. On the one hand, it was MOOCs that rock
the higher education landscape a few years ago, promising or
threatening, depending on whom you ask to change everything.

40:37 A lot of faculty, staff, and the administrators are still
making sense of MOOCs and so I'm glad to talk about them here in the
podcast. On the other hand, it seemed to me from the start that the
disruptive potential of MOOCs was in most cases overrated.

40:49 They were interesting certainly and the potential to engage
thousands of students at once in a shared learning experience, presented
all kinds of teaching and learning opportunities, but I was skeptical
that they would revolutionize higher education as we knew it.

41:02 Now, it's been a few years and higher education is pretty much
where it was back in 2012 and MOOC mania ahead. That mania led a lot of
universities to pay more attention to their educational missions and to
experiment with online learning and other educational technologies, and
that's definitely a good thing.

41:17 I'm not convinced that MOOCs will continue to change higher
ed. The universities and faculty will continue to run MOOCs for
particular purposes and audiences. I myself have two that I helped teach
both focus on preparing graduate students to teach well. I don't see
MOOCs as a disruptive force, some thought they would be back in 2012.

41:34 On that to say, I understand the concerns that Paul Dehaye
raises about the dangers of outsourcing education to for‑profit
companies. I'm skeptical that institutions of higher education will do
that. In part, because some institutions got burned during MOOC mania
and they are approaching vendor relationships with more intentionality
these days.

41:52 That's my take away from Dehaye's warnings. There are dangers
here certainly, but with awareness and some sensible choices, we can
avoid or medicate those dangers.

42:03 For links to some of Paul Dehaye's writings, see the show
notes. You can find those show notes on our website leadinglinespod.com.
Please leave us a comment there or via Twitter where our handle is
@leadinglinespod. I would like to hear what you thought of the interview
on this episode.

42:18 background music

**Derek**:  42:18 Look for new episodes of Leading Lines, the first
and third Monday of each month. I'm your host, Derek Bruff. Thanks for
listening.

Transcription by CastingWords
