---
layout: post
title:  "Episode 004: Jeff Rice"
date:   2016-09-19
excerpt: "Jeff Rice is the inaugural chair of Writing, Rhetoric, and Digital Studies at the University of Kentucky."
episode: true
tag:
- online learning
- social media
- digital studies
comments: true
---

In this episode, we feature an interview with Jeff Rice, inaugural chair of the Department of Writing, Rhetoric & Digital Studies (WRD) at the University of Kentucky. Rice also holds the Martha B. Reynolds Chair in Writing, Rhetoric & Digital Studies, and he’s the author of multiple books and essays, including his most recent book, Craft Obsession: The Social Rhetorics of Beer. Rice recently sat down with John Sloop, Vanderbilt’s Associate Provost for Digital Learning, at the Rhetoric Society of America conference in Atlanta, where the two discussed the mission of “digital studies,” the role of open online education, and the relationship between craft beer and digital communication.

More on Jeff Rice and WRD:

* [Faculty page](https://exit.sc/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwrd.as.uky.edu%2Fusers%2Fjri236)
* [Writing, Rhetoric, and Digital Studies at UK](https://exit.sc/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwrd.as.uky.edu%2F)
* [Yellow Dog, Jeff Rice's blog](https://exit.sc/?url=http%3A%2F%2Fydog.net%2F)
* [@drfabulous](https://exit.sc/?url=https%3A%2F%2Ftwitter.com%2Fdrfabulous) on Twitter


<iframe width="100%" height="450" scrolling="no" frameborder="no" src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/283200891&amp;auto_play=false&amp;hide_related=false&amp;show_comments=true&amp;show_user=true&amp;show_reposts=false&amp;visual=true"></iframe>

 [00:00] [music]

**Derek Bruff**:  [00:06] Welcome to "Leading Lines," a podcast from
Vanderbilt University. I'm your host Derek Bruff, director of the
Vanderbilt Center for Teaching. In this podcast we explore creative,
intentional, and effective uses of technology to enhance student
learning.

[00:19] Uses that point the way to the future of educational
technology in college and university settings. In this episode, we
feature an interview with Jeff Rice, inaugural chair of the Department
of Writing, Rhetoric and Digital Studies at the University of Kentucky.
That's W‑R‑D or WRD as they refer to the department.

[00:37] Rice also holds the Martha B. Reynolds Chair in Writing,
Rhetoric and Digital Studies, and is the author of multiple books and
essays including his most recent book "Craft Obsession: The Social
Rhetorics of Beer."

[00:49] Rice recently sat down with my colleague John Sloop,
Vanderbilt's Associate Provost for Digital Learning and a professor of
communications at the Rhetoric Society of America conference in Atlanta,
where the two discussed the mission of digital studies, the role of open
online education, and the relationship between craft beer and digital
communication.

[01:08] [music]

**John Sloop**:  [01:11] I'm John Sloop. I'm sitting here with Jeff
Rice, the Chair of the Department of Writing, Rhetoric, and Digital
Studies, at the University of Kentucky. He's also the author of Craft
Obsession: The Social Rhetorics of Beer, also "The Rhetoric of Cool:
Composition Studies and New Media," and "Digital Detroit: Rhetoric and
Space in the Age of the Network."

[01:30] One of the reasons I wanted to talk to you, Jeff, was, as
chair of your department, I wanted to talk to you a little about this
department trying to do something with digital studies. In my
experience, I know these departments are starting to emerge, but you
don't see them everywhere.

[01:46] I was hoping you could tell us a little bit about the history
of your department, how it emerged, things like that, how you differ
from other programs.

**Jeff Rice**:  [01:53] The history of what we call WRD, Writing,
Rhetoric, and Digital Studies, does precede me in the sense that there
was an internal report done from an outside, external review before I
ever got to Kentucky, at the time.

[02:10] That came to the conclusion that writing should be more
emphasized at the University of Kentucky and that it was possible, at
that point, that maybe there should be a writing department or something
separate from the English department.

[02:22] At the time, there were two individuals in the department who
were part of that study, who were writing folks. They began a process of
recruitment. They brought in a director of writing.

[02:34] She, in turn, started to recruit faculty to come. The dean
gave her a number of lines. That led, in the beginning, to a division
within the department of English called WRD.

[02:47] My wife, Jenny Rice, and I were part of that recruitment
process along with Vershawn Young and Adam Banks, and I believe Jan
Fernheimer was hired though through a search. We all joined the
division. We were hired into the English department at the time as
English professors, but we operated independently as quasi units.

[03:05] We had our own budget. We had our own minds. We couldn't hire
without English's approval because anybody hired at that time would have
been an English faculty member, but other than TMP we really didn't do
anything with the English department.

[03:17] Meanwhile, she was putting forth as director of this division,
the paperwork for us to become a department. With the dean's approval
and provost's approval went to work its way through the senate, etc.
Finally, two years ago, we became a department and split entirely from
the English department.

[03:35] The main reason, obviously, for having a...Some of it's
political in the sense for a long time people who work in rhetoric and
composition have felt marginalized as English professors. I had already
been in three other English departments before I came to UK. I was at
the University of Missouri when we were recruited.

[03:54] That feeling of marginalization, despite having very good job
placement for graduate students, despite having good placement for
undergraduate students, despite having often extremely strong
publication records, rhetoric and composition still often feels that
it's marginalized in English because it doesn't study literature.

[04:11] The other problem often is that we don't see students multiple
times because there may only be a handful of courses that we'll teach,
so a student may come into our course once and that's it. Whereas the
idea of having our own department would be because you see students many
times. In fact, that they would major in writing. We could work with
them more closely.

[04:31] This was what was really intriguing to me that they'll be more
involved in undergraduate education and they come to Kentucky to do
this. The department is going to its third year. We're building our
major. We have a minor both in writing, rhetoric, and digital Studies.
We also have a minor in professional and technical writing.

[04:51] We have a number of robust courses in a variety of areas of
writing studies, and everything from writing in the social sciences,
science writing, the essay, social media courses, but we also have
courses on the digital side in digital composing, multimedia,
documentary making.

[05:09] Then of course, on the rhetoric side we have history of
rhetoric, rhetorical traditions, and we even now have what I'd call
[inaudible] course. We have a number of courses for students to take
and some special topics, etc. The idea is that students would
professionalize in the subject of writing as they would in any other
subject.

**John**:  [05:30] I want to interrupt here for a second. While I
understand everything you're saying, the part of the title that stands
out, when I first saw the department, is the digital studies part.

[05:41] Not that I know a lot of departments that are just departments
of writing, but digital studies seems the sexy contemporary part of this
title.

[05:50] When you've talked, and when I've looked at your Web page,
there's discussion of writing. I didn't count the words, but maybe more
than the word digital, but digital is a hook for an outsider.

[06:05] Why digital, and how much of an emphasis is that? Do you see
much of a distinction between digital writing and what we think of as
writing?

**Jeff**:  [06:14] I didn't name the department, but I can understand
the reason for putting writing, rhetoric, and the digital together
because of the tradition. I came out of graduate school at the
University of Florida where writing studies and digital studies, they're
not separate.

[06:27] If you think about it for a second, all the writing we do
today, what is not digital? What is not done using any form of
technology, whether you're using word processing, or you're making
infographics, or you're creating video, or you're working in social
media. You are constantly in the digital.

[06:46] The only other exception would be, obviously, using a piece of
paper, which people do, but not often in a professional or academic
sense.

[06:54] This is the tradition I came out of, so it's natural for me to
come to a department that looked at all writing as digital, and not
looking at the distinction that, "OK, first you take your writing
courses over here, and then you take your digital courses over here."

[07:05] Instead, all courses will involve the digital. We're not a
service department, but obviously, we offer the first year writing
sequence, which all students have to take.

[07:15] Even that has a strong digital component, which you can see in
the first year students doing podcasts, making videos, having blogs,
working in wikis, depending on the course, doing audio ethnographies,
doing visual ethnographies, making visual arguments, creating
infographics.

[07:36] What form of expression today is not digital? We have that
throughout all of our curriculum. We'll have certain courses, one called
digital composing, one called multimedia, that would emphasize the
digital a little bit more, but the fact is you could take any course
with us and it's very likely that you are going to do a presentation
using either video, or at the very least, the most basic PowerPoint.

[08:03] That might not even be a good description of what you're going
to do in a presentation situation, or you might be asked to create a
website, or you may be asked to create a podcast. It really depends
on...I've used online archiving tools for classes, I've used weblogs for
classes, I've used video for classes.

[08:19] There's really no differentiation today between composing in
general, and composing in terms of the digital. Only the fact that a lot
of the rhetorical gestures and moves you'll make, there may be some
additional things you're going to learn when you're working in digital
media.

**John**:  [08:35] I agree with you totally, but there would be a way
of teaching students how to write for a podcast, or how to write for
blogs, without teaching them the tools, how to edit on Audacity for
example, or something like that. Do you teach them the tools as well, is
that part of what you do?

**Jeff**:  [08:53] Here's a good differentiation between us and the
School of Communication at UK, which offers courses in strategic
communication, and media arts and studies, I believe is the other degree
they offer.

[09:07] When we have students who come over and work with us we see
the difference might be that we might teach you, for example, some basic
skills of using Photoshop, or iMovie, or Audacity. Our purpose is not
that you become an expert in the tool, but that you learn about
organizational skills, you learn about editing, you learn about reaching
an audience.

[09:31] Let's say you're working in video or in the visual, you learn
about juxtaposition as a rhetorical gesture, when I put all my things
together can I create a certain effect for the audience?

[09:40] Whereas if you are on the other side, in comm, not to belittle
the comm side, but that is not really part of the curriculum. It is more
about becoming very adept at Photoshop.

[09:51] We're assuming some basic stuff, we're not going to make you
the best videographer, but we're going to show you some basic skills in
video editing and video production, so that you can...but the rhetorical
side of things is more what we're going to emphasize, in terms of
research, organization, audience understanding, persuasion, in the
digital environment.

[10:13] There's a bit of a difference, but that's why we try very much
to work with the communication folks, so that students on their side
might minor over on our side, and students on our side might minor on
their side, so that they get both sides of the equation.

**John**:  [10:26] I was going to ask, how often does that happen, how
many students do a bit about...?

**Jeff**:  [10:30] From any strategic communication, we're finding
more and more...we're only in our second year, but we're finding more
and more students who are interested in taking courses with us, and
minoring with us.

[10:39] There are some political issues that sometimes prevent some of
the faculty on that side from the recommendation, but we also have some
colleagues over there who understand this is beneficial to both sides
for students to minor across, and take courses across the colleges.

[10:53] We encourage it on our side, any student on our side who wants
to take a course in communication we're very enthusiastic.

[10:58] We see some of their students come over, they'll say, "Look, I
learned how to work in Adobe After Effects over there pretty well, but I
didn't learn audience, and I didn't learn organization, and I didn't
learn specific rhetorical strategies, like appropriation or how to
aggregate information or situation. I'm getting that over here."

[11:16] That's what's best, is that they're getting both sides. If
they want to go on to work in mass media they'll have, hopefully, an
edge on students who didn't study rhetoric or writing.

**John**:  [11:31] So far, if your dean or present head was looking at
your department, would they be happy with the direction it's going, do
you think, or are you having to make some adjustments as you go along?

**Jeff**:  [11:41] No, I think so. I think we've done really well in
the first couple of years. We started from nothing, because when a
student comes to any university, but let's just say the University of
Kentucky, it's very likely, even if they don't know what's being taught
in sociology, or psychology, or anthropology, they've heard of those
subjects.

[11:59] They know there's something called, "Anthropology," but what
student has ever heard of something called, "Rhetoric writing, writing
American digital studies." You've never heard of it, it didn't exist.

[12:09] We've had to spend a lot of time selling, and using our own
understanding of persuasion, and argumentation, to convince students,
"Look, here's something you might want to minor in. Here's something you
might want to major in."

[12:22] We have a number of double majors, because students are
thinking, "Well, this might help me get a job better," than just being
an English major, or just being a psychology major, or just being this
major.

[12:33] I would say yes, they'd be pleased because we've gone from
zero to...last year, we had 24 majors in our second year. If the number
of students who are declared as freshmen come this fall, as we're hoping
they will, we'll be at 40‑something majors in the fall.

[12:51] My anticipation is after four or five years we'll be 100 and
something majors. I think that would be great. In terms of our scholarly
production and all that, that was already set, we have nationally known
faculty in our department. There's no problem on the sense with the kind
of scholarship we are producing.

[13:07] In terms of a department that generates revenue, it turns out
we're one of the leaders in the college, very quickly generating a lot
of revenue, because we've quickly taken a stance that we want to be a
healthy department.

[13:20] We want to do what's right for the students in terms of making
things cost‑effective for them, while at the same time opening up
revenue streams for us, for example, textbook production.

[13:28] We don't work with any major textbook publishers, we produce
our own textbook. It only costs the students \$40, we keep \$30 of it,
things like that. We've also taken up the entrepreneur spirit of the
university which is often encouraged today.

[13:42] We're going to see, I think, very quickly, students...we're
already placing students in internships in our second year, which we're
very happy about.

**John**:  [13:50] Tell me a little bit about that, what I'm
interested in hearing is, if you're students are...if I was an
undergraduate, what would attract me would be, again I don't want to
keep harping back to this but, the digital studies part, is that
what's...?

**Jeff**:  [14:04] It's part of it, but also there are students who've
traditionally majored in other things, thinking, 'I want to write," or
"I wanna be involved in Web development," "I wanna be involved in
content management," "I wanna be involved in the production of certain
materials for certain industries."

[14:20] Every industry has writing involved. I once wrote in the
diamond and jewelry industry. For example, in Kentucky there's a horse
industry, Keeneland is one of the big tracks in the country.

[14:29] The odds if you're an equine, going to work in veterinarian
medicine in terms of the actual care of horses are probably small, not a
lot of opportunities, but working in the communicative aspect of the
horse industry, in terms of producing promotional videos, in‑house
documentation, publications for the industry, extremely high.

[14:48] Still a lot of opportunity, Web development. What we're
offering is an opportunity to learn skills that will get students jobs
in those areas. I'm just using the horse industry as one example.

[14:59] Biology students, for example, one of our pitches to the
biology...biology's one of the biggest majors in the college, but we
know that all these students who are majoring in biology, maybe 10
percent are going to med school, at the most. Most of them are not going
to be doctors.

[15:14] But, what if I'm good at science enough that I understand
science, I'm not good enough to be a doctor, but I want to work in the
health industry. There's a great deal of work to be done in creating the
documentation, information, app development, content management, working
for the pharmaceutical companies producing the literature.

[15:33] All kinds of opportunities if you're a good communicator in
the print, and in the digital. This is how we pitch ourselves to
students. Engineering students who need persuasion skills, and
argumentative skills. It's not just that you design something, you have
to convince both the folks you work with, "This is a good product I'm
creating."

[15:54] You have to convince your investors, is this something that's
worth pursuing. Eventually, the public will have to be convinced. I have
a lot of pitches I use, a lot of examples, historical examples about why
this is important. You have engineering students going, 'You know what,
maybe I do want to minor in this after all."

[16:11] I think it's attractive from a number of perspectives. One is,
without belittling the other folks in the humanities or even English
where I came from, I never really heard in four other English
departments, the issue of job placement.

[16:23] That doesn't mean we're vocational, it just means, in addition
to the lifelong learning goals that we all have in humanities, we are
very, very concerned with job placement. We can't guarantee you, but we
want to help put you in situations in which your employable, because you
have the edge.

[16:40] You have the communicative skills in writing that every single
survey that we see produced keeps claiming. Everyone keeps claiming. We
want students to be better writers. We can teach the content, but we
want them to be better communicators in writing and the use of digital
communication. That's what we're offering. Those skills that,
supposedly, everybody wants.

**John**:  [17:01] We're going to see...I know there are other
departments that you have pointed, but in some ways, you're doing an
interesting experiment. What I see at a lot of places, including in
Vanderbilt, there are always outlets for you to tell parents or tell the
students, "Yes, she should major in this, and you can also pick up a
minor in managerial studies," etc.

[17:22] You're trying to put the practical together with that, but in
one department you're getting both of those in one place, the way you
guys are doing it. It's going to be an interesting experiment to see how
that works out.

**Jeff**:  [17:32] We've seen this one at social media class, which is
one of our large classes. I'm a marketing major, I'm learning all the
nuts and bolts that marketing does, that personally I don't know what it
is, but one thing I'm not learning is argumentation and persuasion,
which is at the heart of marketing.

[17:47] I'm not learning how to use visual tools for marketing, I'm
not learning how to make up infographics and do the research to create a
productive infographic. I understand how to reach the...I can do the
audience analysis in marketing, maybe, but I don't understand what I do
with that information afterwards in terms of being persuasive.

[18:03] Minor with us. We're not telling anybody not to major in
something. We're not telling anybody that the other majors are inferior
to us. My argument is never that, because it's not true. This is
something additional that we think will help you be a better lifelong
learner and a better student, but also, we believe, more employable.

[18:21] We know from studying, the way this works, that engineers can
increase their marketability for jobs when they have better written
communication skills. They just do.

[18:35] That gives you the edge on the other candidate. We're not the
only writing department, obviously. Texas, Syracuse, very, very good
writing departments. Minnesota has one too.

[18:48] There are others across the country, and this is the movement
of writing splitting from English, and English might want to really
think about. They are thinking about what they're doing, taking it more
seriously as writing departments break off and have success.

**John**:  [19:04] It really is an interesting moment. I'm coming from
rhetoric [inaudible] communication, which have also been seen as
step‑children at times. It's an interesting moment where if we do this
right, and we educate, and make how we're educating important for job
placement, it's really an interesting mix right now.

[19:29] I want to move on to a couple of other questions. Talk a
little bit to me about the faculty you're hiring and where your
department as a whole, where do you see it going, how you're going to
grow as both a research department, which is part of your mission.

**Jeff**:  [19:42] The biggest concern when people form writing
departments often is that they're going to be delegated to service,
meaning they will only teach first year writing, maybe some technical
writing, and maybe some business writing. That is not our mission.

[19:55] The dean has made it very clear that it was never supposed to
be our mission. We don't feel it's our mission. We do offer those
courses obviously, but in addition we feel we're serving intellectually
the university by offering more advanced courses in writing and digital
communication.

[20:10] We've just gone through our first hiring because I took over
after a couple departures. We hired an individual from South Florida
who's very good in environmental communication and technical writing.

[20:23] We see this as a great area for us particularly in our ability
to partner with environmental studies at University of Kentucky, which
is very important, and continue to build the science writing area which
we still think technical and professional writing is extremely important
in what we do.

[20:39] Then we've also hired someone else from the University of
Wisconsin who specializes in citizenship and studying particularly in
China and in Hong Kong, questions, the rhetoric of citizenship and
identity politics, and affect, which we think is important also for the
theoretical parts of our department.

[21:00] We do rhetorical theory as well, and this will be an
additional rhetorical theorist for us and in a particularly interesting
area. Not to say that she will only work in issues of China, but having
another person who can speak to issues that are global is important to
us as well.

[21:18] We have people who specialize in rhetorical theory, in Jewish
studies, in digital media, in food studies, and literacy studies. We see
the department as varied with a lot of specialties, just like any
department.

**John**:  [21:35] I'm going to move into a different area here. I
know you personally and I know some of your commentary, your offhand
commentary about online education. I'm wondering if you can give us some
of your thoughts here about...I'm going to open this up broadly, so feel
free to riff on it, you're thoughts on...

[21:53] We're clearly, in some sense, we're in that moment of
dissolution that with MOOCs. There was the big talk a couple of years
ago, in revolutionary. There are still all sorts of promise there, in my
thinking, but it's changed.

[22:07] What are your thoughts on where MOOCs might go, or online
education in general, whatever you want to take of that? That means, as
you know, I'm not teaching you anything here, that means multiple things
to multiple people. Flipped classrooms, yada, yada, yada. If I was to
ask you just like this, what are your broad thoughts on where we're
going?

**Jeff**:  [22:28] The four places I've been at, three were Research I
universities. Research I universities have historically not embraced
online education the way smaller colleges have, and that's been
detrimental to the universities from a practical standpoint because
they've lost out on a lot of revenue, frankly.

[22:43] I know when we were in Missouri, Missouri would look across
the street at Columbia College and be like, "I don't get it. That's tiny
little school is generating so much money in online education and we're
not."

[22:53] Some of it has just historically been hostility and the
preference for face‑to‑face over the online. Some of it is just the real
lack of understanding of what online education might offer. In our
department we offer few courses online, but they're just service courses
in the summer or mid‑semester for students who need to pick up a course.

[23:12] We still don't see UK as being a leader in this regard either
and smaller schools are often the leaders. Even when we're saying, "We
need more revenue, we need more revenue."

[23:19] The MOOC discussion obviously comes out of that and the idea
that we're going to figure out...we can reach a 1,000 students or 30,000
students at once, but they haven't figured out how to monetize it since
only 10 percent of the students historically complete the course, if
even.

[23:33] That means a lot of students are just hanging out, which also
meant that the early attraction to MOOCs was actually not for students
that are currently setting for degrees, but people who just want to take
a course to learn about an idea, or just want to hang out for a little
bit, or even people like myself who are just curious of what's going on.

[23:51] If I signed up for MOOC it was never to do the course, it was
just to try to understand how does it work.

[23:58] Whether MOOCs are good or not, I think was always the mistake
in terms of how we looked at it and like anything in education we treat
new ideas in a hyperbolic manner which is either it's, "Oh, my gosh,
this is the greatest thing in the world. This is going to solve all our
problems."

[24:12] Or you have the flip at the time which was, "Oh, this the end
of liberal education and the humanities, and this is neo‑liberal, and
blah, blah, blah." It turns out it was neither, and there was nothing
really incredible about MOOCs except for the fact that there were those
that were successful were reaching audiences that otherwise couldn't
obtain some form of American education.

[24:34] You have a lot of Chinese, and Indians, and Russians, taking
some of these courses to learn about something that was going on in our
system that couldn't come to America and take a course.

[24:44] There's still great potential with online education in terms
of the large scale part, which the MOOC offers, in terms of reaching,
for example, populations in America, so Kentucky, that might be reaching
out to eastern Kentucky where folks often don't go to college.

[24:59] Or there might be other opportunities to shift the classroom
to online and face‑to‑face, or just online, but for whatever reason
we're often really hostile. We just think immediately, "This is terrible
and this is going to ruin everything we're currently doing," without
just spending some time thinking about how can we do it.

[25:13] The other problem is that we outsource everything. Almost
every university involved in it has a department of computer science.
Some department interested in pedagogy, whether it's writing, or
education, or English, or whatever, and yet all of these tools are
outsourced, which is incredibly expensive.

[25:30] Coursera, or whoever, they see that opportunity because they
see the universities are never going to produce a large scale operation,
but what Coursera was offering, just like it's predecessors at the
smaller little Blackboard and before Blackboard, WebCT, basically just
shells that don't do much more than we could have created on our own for
exchanging files, message board, email.

[25:52] There's nothing particularly amazing about Coursera. It
doesn't even host the videos that I use for the lectures. You just embed
YouTube videos. Anybody can create a shell in which you embed a YouTube
video for a lecture. There's still great potential they just haven't...

**John**:  [26:08] They are able to offer marketing, for example, that
you can offer...

**Jeff**:  [26:11] But we have a marketing department in the...We have
a whole group of people studying marketing.

**John**:  [26:14] I don't disagree with you there, I'm just pointing
out that it's harder to reach multiple students in India.

**Jeff**:  [26:20] They were basing it on brand, of course. Obviously
Harvard, and Duke, and John Hopkins, and Stanford have a better brand
than the University of Kentucky, but Vande has a good brand already, so
we already have a good brand.

[26:32] We do have a brand because on the other hand, it's really
weird, it's like any other university, probably Vande as well, would get
a lot of foreign international students, because international students
pay a lot of money to come, so it's really important to a university to
recruit international students who are not on an [inaudible]
scholarship.

[26:46] You can still do something similar online, even if you offered
a huge discount and still make it profitable. The potential is there, we
just haven't figured it out for all kinds...sometimes for political
reasons. UK, one...

[27:02] We're trying to do this in my department too, we're trying to
move into the online in our department very quickly in a sense of
offering first a certificate, and we have specific audiences in mind for
this certificate.

[27:14] We know these audiences will pay to do this certificate
because of the professions they're in, and then we've also talked to the
science folks about an online MA in science writing for people already
in the science industry. Both, if successful, could be extremely
profitable, but the problem, I don't know about Vande but the problem
with UK is bureaucracy.

[27:32] It takes forever to get anything approved, and so long, and
then the other question, to someone who gets to improve, the other
question, again, I don't know how it is at Vanderbilt, but at Kentucky
we're told all the time, "You should do this, you should do this,"
there'll be profit sharing.

[27:47] Unlike any other entrepreneur scheme we can think of, it's
never actually clear what the profit sharing is going to be. Do we get
50 percent of the department? Do we get 30 percent? Do we get 20
percent?

[27:58] Our colleagues in geography have right off the bat a
successful online MA that's doing really well, they haven't seen a dime
from it even though the tuitions have been paid, and they still don't
know what are they going to see in their own department from it.

[28:10] There's not a lot of incentive if you're in a department to do
all this work with no seed money from the university sometimes, or very
little, almost no support, we're talking about marketing, and then
you're not even told what is your share going to be from your
department.

[28:23] We have the intellectual ability to do all of this and do it
well. We don't have the infrastructural ability because we have so much
bureaucracy and not enough open communication about, "OK, let's be
partners."

[28:37] The university, the college, and the department, let's be
partners and figure out what is fair and how the seed money works, and
how the sharing of the profits work, our efforts, and we'll find better
success in online education. Rather than let's just hire someone for
\$3,000 to teach an online course. Let's do it a better way.

[28:53] Not a lot of willingness yet, but the potential is still
there. I'm not worried about MOOCs destroying anything, they aren't
going to destroy anything at all. They're not an evil thing, nothing is
evil in itself, it's that we're going with the pedagogical innovations
that are put in front us.

**John**:  [29:08] I'm just going to ask you two more questions. First
one, what is your favorite non‑digital education technology?

**Jeff**:  [29:20] My favorite non‑digital education technology might
be a "technology," so I'll put that in spare quotes, that students
absolutely, positively hate. I've never seen any group of students in a
classroom like this. It's called group work.

[29:38] If group work is a kind of technology, the collaborative
atmosphere of sharing, as well as frustration, group work is still the
best...the wisdom of crowds, the hive mind, I still think is the best
way for learning in the classroom that students, in my experience, hate
working in groups no matter what.

[30:05] You think of a technology, the fact that you're putting three
or four smart people together, not that there'll be some smarter they
came to the university, they got accepted to the university, they're
smart, there's no doubt about it.

[30:14] But the idea that now you have to work with other individuals,
you have to compromise, you have to be responsible, you have to be
mature, you have to share opinions, you have to learn from each other,
that's an important "technology."

**John**:  [30:23] That's hard when you've seen grades as
competitive...

**Jeff**:  [30:26] It's hard for us, at our level, to do it, I
understand too. It's hard for professors to do it. It's extremely
difficult, and I explain it all the time. It's not going to be easy. I
don't even like working in groups sometimes, but I think it's incredibly
important.

[30:39] If that's a technology, the working as a group, that is still
what I try to teach over and over again. One of the most essential
skills to learn is working with other people. Did that make sense?

**John**:  [30:49] Yeah, it makes perfect sense. I don't want to talk
to you without giving you an opportunity, both because I want to give
you an opportunity to talk about it, and also because I'm interested.
Talking about your most recent book coming out on Craft Obsession: The
Social Rhetorics of Beer, I know you've had an interest in beer.

[31:04] You talk about beer through social media, etc. Can you talk a
little bit about what you see the book doing? In your position as chair
of this department, does this tie back into digital studies? How does
this tie back into digital studies?

**Jeff**:  [31:18] Yes. Basically, this book comes out of my interest
in social media, in social media rhetorics, which I would call things
like the antidote, the telling of a personal story online, or saying
something personal online. Repetition, what Tony Sampson calls the
"Contagion," aggregation, the assemblage of a lot of different things in
the space, sharing, which could be information or images, etc.

[31:46] This book takes those concepts, what I call "Social media
rhetorics," and explores them through the lens of craft beer. Now you
say, "What craft beer?" It could be anything. The basic reason, of
course, is that craft beer functions by way of social media.

[32:02] Basically, we have small breweries. We don't have operating
budgets and marketing budgets. We're dependent on telling their story.
They're creating their brand and creating connections and sharing with
an audience that they otherwise can't reach. That's one of the main
reasons.

[32:17] The other reason is because this group of folks who congregate
in social media, who are taking pictures of what they're drinking and
sharing them, who are on the message boards in the applications and
Untappd, and RateBeer, and BeerAdvocate in Twitter, in Instagram, in
Facebook, there's so many beer groups on Facebook, they're obsessed.
They're obsessed with this product.

[32:38] The other reason, of course, is because I am part of that
group. I'm obsessed as well. I'm a craft beer drinker. All my books get
a little more personal each time. What I wanted to do was also talk
about not just...The object of the study is not just craft beer. The
object of the study is not just social media. It's also me.

[32:54] [inaudible] Ong famously documents how Peter Ramus divorced
the personal from writing by creating the outline. There have been a
number of Peters over the years who try to bring the personal back into
the object of study.

[33:08] This is not to be expressive. This is not to be navel‑gazing,
but understand we're often implicated, if not always, in the subject of
the study.

[33:16] There's a reason why you study. There's an exigence for what
you're studying. Sometimes, it's because I'm part of this, too. I'm
interested in this. This sparks me. This motivates me. This enthralls me
or disgusts me, whatever the case may be. I'm also part of the study as
I go through and try to think about how social media works rhetorically.

[33:31] I hope this book will appeal to academics who are interested
in studying the rhetoric of social media, just the way I think my other
books have done, studying the rhetoric of networks or the rhetoric of
writing.

[33:42] The other two books is divided very similarly into sections
that are the rhetorical gestures and strategies, but that they would
also be interested from the craft beer side, to think in a more complex
manner about how this particular movement...

[33:58] It's part of the larger movement of artists and the foods.
It's taken over the country and other parts of the world in the last 20
years, how it works rhetorically. It will be a great, great book.

[34:11] It's digital because it's the study of social media. It's one
thing to study social media and say, "Facebook is invading our privacy,"
or something very commonplace, but it's another thing to think about,
not from a judgmental point of view, but how does social media work
rhetorically.

[34:28] How does repetition work? Just a brief example, one thing that
happens often in craft beer is people tell their first time of having a
beer. There are so many brewers and so many drinkers who write, whether
it's in a memoir, or a book about the history of craft beer, or an
article, "The first time I had a beer."

[34:48] It's usually, "I was in the yard. It was hot. I was a kid. I
was mowing the lawn with my dad or doing yard work with my dad. He gave
me a lager ‑‑ a cold lager." It's almost everybody's first story. It's
my first story. I was in the yard, working with my dad. He gave me a
Heineken.

[35:05] We call it as contagion. It's a repetition. Repetition creates
meaning. We think we're the originator of a story. Instead, we repeat
it. The other repeated narrative ideal found early in the book is the
craft beer narrative of revolution. This is a revolution. A revolution
is a repeated narrative.

[35:21] Lots of things are repeated narratives, if we think about it.
This stands for the way repetition works online, that we repeat things
online often, without thinking about the fact that, I'm just borrowing a
previous expression and making it my own, without realizing I'm a...It
means I'm a part of a larger conversation, actually.

[35:36] I do this kind of work with other subject matters as well,
besides beer. For example, "I am," if you think about "I am" for a
second ‑‑ just to get off tangent for a second ‑‑ I am the 99 percent.
That was a tangent. That was a statement, meaning I'm not the one
percent that's controlling the country. I'm part of the majority.

[35:55] Also, Je suis Charlie, after the Charlie Hebdo massacres. Je
suis Juif, after the massacre at the kosher grocery store right after
that. I'm a Liberian during the Ebola crisis. I am Harvard, Harvard
students who are African American protesting the idea that they don't
belong there. I am a 1968 garbage worker strike. I am a man.

[36:16] There's a long history by hems, meaning it's a repetition.
It's a contagion. In social media, that picks up on all these current "I
ams." The same thing for craft beer, you have this kind of repetitions,
what I called "Contagions."

[36:27] This is a social media rhetoric. When you understand that and
when you understand that you're part of a larger conversation, you
understand persuasion online in a very different manner, because you
understand there's a larger audience at stake than just the statement
itself.

[36:39] That's just a brief example of why this is important for
digital studies, whether or not you're interested in craft beer. If
you're interested in craft beer, it's a plus.

[36:45] [laughter]

**John**:  [36:47] All right. I'm going to draw this to a close. Thank
you for being with us here today.

**Jeff**:  [36:52] Thank you.

**John**:  [36:53] We look forward to reading the book. Actually, I
have read the book, but I'm looking forward to others reading the book.
All right. Thank you, Jeff.

**Jeff**:  [36:58] Thank you, John.

[36:59] [music]

**Derek**:  [37:01] That was Jeff Rice, professor of Writing,
Rhetoric, and Digital Studies at the University of Kentucky. You can
read more about Rice and his department by following the links in the
show notes.

[37:11] As I reflect on that interview, I'm reminded of a quandary I
found myself in a few years ago. I was teaching a first year writing
seminar at Vanderbilt. I was interested in having my students create
some form of digital product as part of the course, something more
visual than the typical 10‑page research paper.

[37:27] I held off, however, feeling down by the requirements for
writing seminars set by the school, regarding the number of pages
students had to write in one of these courses. It was a writing seminar,
after all. Students needed to write.

[37:39] I created some interesting and authentic writing assignments
for the course, but I didn't have students engaged in the kind of
digital multimedia work I wanted. What form of expression is not
digital? That's something Jeff Rice said in his interview. It reflects
the philosophy of his department about the nature of communication
today.

[37:56] I'm encouraged by that. The next time I teach my writing
seminar, I won't take those page count requirements quite so seriously.
My experience with Leading Lines has me thinking about student‑produced
podcasts, for instance.

[38:09] How do you see writing in digital media fitting in the
undergraduate curriculum today? Should we maintain traditional writing
requirements, or should this be expanded to more general digital
communications requirements?

[38:20] What might a digital across‑the‑curriculum movement look like?
What would it take to make it work? Let us know what you think at our
website, leadinglinespod.com, or on Twitter, where out handle is
@LeadingLinesPod.

[38:33] You've been listening to Leading Lines, a podcast on
educational technology from Vanderbilt University. The podcast is
produced by the Center for Teaching, the Vanderbilt Institute for
Digital Learning, the Office of Scholarly Communications, and the
Associate Provost for Digital Learning.

[38:46] Look for new episodes the first and third Monday of each
month. I'm your host, Derek Bruff. Thanks for listening.

[38:51] [music]

