---
layout: post
title:  "Episode 010: Steve Baskauf"
date:   2016-12-19
excerpt: "Steve Baskauf is a senior lecturer in biological sciences at Vanderbilt University."
episode: true
tag:
- STEM
- linked data
- semantic web
comments: true
---

In this episode we feature an interview with Steve Baskauf, senior lecturer in biological sciences at Vanderbilt University.  Steve coordinates the introductory biological sciences labs, trains and mentors the undergraduate and graduate student teaching assistants for those labs, and designing and assesses inquiry-based lab curricula.  However, this interview focuses on another aspect of his work at Vanderbilt: biodiversity informatics.  Steve has developed Bioimages, an online image database with over 10,000 annotated plant and ecosystem images, and he has created mobile-friendly tree tours of the Vanderbilt campus.  We talked with Steve about the semantic web, linked data, and the challenges and opportunities of creating and using machine-readable datasets.   

Links:

* [Steve Baskauf's website](https://my.vanderbilt.edu/baskauf/)
* [@baskaufs](https://twitter.com/baskaufs) on Twitter
* [@vutrees](https://www.instagram.com/vutrees/) on Instagram
* [Vanderbilt Arboretum Tree Tours](http://vanderbilt.edu/trees/tours/)
* [Bioimages website](http://bioimages.vanderbilt.edu/)
* [Linked Data and Semantic Web working group](https://heardlibrary.github.io/semantic-web/) at the Vanderbilt Library

<iframe width="100%" height="450" scrolling="no" frameborder="no" src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/298219930&amp;auto_play=false&amp;hide_related=false&amp;show_comments=true&amp;show_user=true&amp;show_reposts=false&amp;visual=true"></iframe>

## Episode 10: Steve Baskauf

[00:00] [background music]

**Derek Bruff**:  [00:10] Welcome to "Leading Lines," a podcast about
Vanderbilt University. I'm your host, Derek Bruff, Director of the
Vanderbilt Center for Teaching.

[00:13] In this podcast, we explore creative intentional and effective
uses of technology to enhance student learning, uses that point the way
to the future of educational technology in college and university
settings. In this episode, we feature an interview with Steve Baskauf,
Senior Lecturer in Biological Sciences at Vanderbilt University.

[00:30] Steve coordinates the introductory biological sciences labs,
trains and mentors the undergraduate and graduate student, teaching
assistants for those labs, and designs and assesses inquiry‑based lab
curricula.

[00:41] However, this interview focuses on another aspect of his work
at Vanderbilt, biodiversity informatics. Steve has developed Bioimages,
an online image database with over 10,000 annotated plant and ecosystem
images. He has created mobile‑friendly tree tours of the Vanderbilt
Campus.

[00:57] The interview was conducted by my colleague, Cliff Anderson,
Associate University Librarian for Research and Learning. Cliff and
Steve discuss the semantic web, linked to data, and the challenges and
opportunities of creating and using machine‑readable datasets.

[01:09] [background music]

**Cliff Anderson**:  [01:11] Hi, this is Cliff Anderson with the
Leading Lines podcast. I'm here with Steve Baskauf. Steve, why don't you
introduce yourself and tell us a little bit about your role at
Vanderbilt?

**Steve Baskauf**:  [01:23] I'm a Senior Lecturer in the Department of
Biological Sciences. My primary responsibility is running the Intro to
Biological Sciences Labs for majors. However, on the side, I also have a
biological images database and repository called Bioimages that I run.

**Cliff**:  [01:49] One of the things that Steve does here is also
keep a database of the trees on campus. That, I think, is also connected
with your Bioimages project.

[02:00] Why don't you talk, just to introduce people, because they may
not know Vanderbilt has this wonderful arboretum, how your work got
started with the trees on campus?

**Steve**:  [02:11] I've always loved the trees on Vanderbilt campus,
pretty much like everyone else. I was interested in developing online
tools that would allow people to explore the arboretum.

[02:28] Probably 10 or 15 years ago, I started developing an online
tree tour. Actually, it wasn't really online, it was supposed to be run
on your laptop from a CD. I quickly discovered that that really didn't
work very well, because I tried walking around campus holding my laptop.
It was a little bit heavy.

[02:55] Right as I was pondering that, the iPhone came out. I realized
that this is actually the platform that we need for allowing people to
explore the arboretum, so I transformed the online tree tour that I had
made for laptops into one that was optimized for portable devices. I've
been working on that.

[03:19] In some ways, it's integrated with the Bioimages project,
because the images of the trees are part of the Bioimages collection.
There's a separate website for the arboretum, which is at
vanderbilt.edu/trees, if you want to check it out. There's content there
that's specifically developed for the purpose of helping people to learn
about the history and the diversity of the arboretum.

[03:51] The actual tree tours that you can take on your phone, which
are also accessible from the arboretum website, are based on the
technology that underlies Bioimages.

**Cliff**:  [04:04] This is a good opportunity then to introduce
Bioimages, which is an incredibly rich project that you've developed
over the last few years based on some really innovative technologies.
We'll talk in detail about what we mean by the Semantic Web, but why
don't you just introduce the project?

**Steve**:  [04:26] Bioimages started off as an idea I had after I
took plant taxonomy class. I struggled with trying to key trees out and
other plants using a book that had no pictures in it, only the technical
terminology. I thought this would just be so much easier if I could
actually see what these plant features looked like.

[04:49] I started off by taking a lot of detailed photographs of
different parts of plants. Not just the whole tree, but what do the buds
look like? What do the leaves look like? What do the edges of the leaves
look like, and so forth, with the idea that these images could be built
into tools that would help people to learn better.

[05:14] Bruce Kirchoff, who is one of my collaborators, has used them
to create some online tools to help people more effectively learn how to
recognize plants by sight identification, as opposed to keying them out.

[05:33] Early on, one of the issues that I struggled with was how do
you keep track of the information about the images? The technical term
we would use for that is the metadata. How do you keep track of the
metadata? How do you keep track of the images? How do you link that all
together?

[05:55] I started asking questions trying to figure out what the best
practices were for that. That was basically how I got sucked into the
whole Semantic Web thing.

[06:06] Bioimages, if you go to the website, which is,
bioimages.vanderbilt.edu, it appears primarily to be an image database.
That is a major component. The images are there. Underneath the images,
there's an information layer that's not quite so obvious. That
information layer is built on the principles of Linked Data and the
Semantic Web.

**Cliff**:  [06:37] Why don't we just define both these terms? They're
related, but they're not synonymous. What do we mean, first, by Linked
Data? Why don't we start with that?

**Steve**:  [06:51] Linked Data, actually Semantic Web comes a little
earlier than that. I'll just...

**Cliff**:  [06:59] We'll go with Semantic Web first, sure.

**Steve**:  [07:02] We can flesh this out a little bit more in a
moment. Tim Berners‑Lee, who basically invented the Web and wrote the
standards for how web pages communicate with each other and how they're
linked and that sort of thing. Soon after he conceived this idea of a
human readable and traversable web, he also came up with the idea of a
machine traversable web.

[07:31] Everyone is familiar with Google. Google scraps content from
the Web, and then has to try to figure out what it means. When you do a
Google search for a particular thing, Google has to basically guess what
the web pages are about so that they can present you with the
information that you're looking for.

[07:55] Tim Berners‑Lee's idea was that there would be this parallel
web to the human readable World Wide Web, which he called the Semantic
Web.

[08:06] In that Web, machines or software would be able to know what
web pages meant and would be able to go from one web page to another and
learn things in a machine readable way, in the same way that a human
surfs the Web by clicking on hyperlinks.

[08:30] That's basically the idea of the Semantic Web. In a machine
readable document, you would encode information in a way that a machine
could understand and that machine could also draw inferences that maybe
weren't directly stated, but that were implied or entailed by the
information.

[08:54] Perhaps, it was contained in two different web pages.

[08:56] Linked Data is a lower level implementation of this. The
primary thing that Linked Data depends upon is the idea of URI as both
an identifier and also a way of acquiring information. Most people are
familiar with a URL. You might see a URL on an advertisement or
something. If you type it in the bar at the top of your browser, it
takes you to a web page.

[09:36] What Linked Data does is basically says that a URI, which is
kind of a superset of URLs, is not only a way to access or to retrieve
information about a thing, but it's actually an identifier for the thing
itself. We're used to the idea that a web page has a URL, but something
like a tree, that is a physical object, can have a URI.

[10:08] If you put that URI in a web browser, it doesn't give you the
tree, but rather it denotes that this URI stands for that tree. If you
put that URI into a web browser, it will give you information or
metadata about that tree, preferably in a machine‑readable format, but
also in a human‑readable format.

[10:38] This idea that URIs can stand for things and that you can
connect things to other things through using URIs is really what
underlies the idea of Linked Data.

**Cliff**:  [10:55] One of the things that Steve's been doing is
helping us to lead a working group on the Semantic Web. What's been
fascinating is that we've discovered many faculty and students are
coming together with similar sorts of problems, and in this working
group, we're applying these principles to their datasets.

[11:17] What's really nice about that is, we talked about the two
cultures, science and the humanities, and yet the Semantic Web really is
bridging both of these cultures. There's a very strong cultural heritage
community. There's also a very strong community in lots of the natural
sciences, perhaps most in biomedical, but maybe you could say more about
where that community is. You're a specialist in that area.

**Steve**:  [11:43] My professional involvement in this is in the
Biodiversity Informatics group, so I work a lot with an organization
called TDWG, which is a biodiversity information standards organization.

[12:04] My work there has to do with developing standards for how you
describe things like museum specimens and organisms, where they're
located, what their taxonomic identities are, so how do you describe
those in a machine‑readable way and then link them to other things.

[12:25] Even though it seems like this is quite different from
something like a cultural heritage project, there are actually a lot of
similarities, because there are agents which would be things like people
or organizations involved in both of them. Usually, they have some kind
of geographic component, some places, there's a time component.

[12:49] There's a literature component, so how you refer to a journal
article by means of a DOI, which is an example of a URI that stands for
a particular thing, which in this case should be a journal article or a
book or something like that. There's a lot of common problems of how you
connect these things that are found both in the scientific community and
in the cultural heritage community.

[13:24] One of the projects that we've been workshopping is Tracy
Millers' Chinese Temple data. If you look the issues involved in her
project, which is locations and metadata about temples and images, it's
really very parallel to the same issues that I have with trees that are
found on different geographic locations that are documented by images.

[13:51] The solutions that you would use with Linked Data between that
kind of cultural heritage project in a Biodiversity Informatics project,
they are really very similar.

**Cliff**:  [14:09] The connections between these projects, I think
they're similar, but on the other hand, one of the things that's
challenging for people coming into this area is to become familiar with
the vocabularies that they can use.

[14:23] A typical project in digital scholarship, people have a
dataset, they elect to use a database ‑‑ typically, it's a relational
database ‑‑ they put their information into rows and columns, maybe
they'll do a little bit of a connection between tables, and then develop
a website, which works really well for the intention that they designed
it.

[14:45] It gets on the web, people can query the data, but what's
lacking is the connections to other projects, and there's a great deal
of repetition of the information. For example, if we're talking about a
tree database, if you're going to develop your project that way, you'd
have to import all the information about geographic locations into your
tables and every other aspect of the information that you wanted to
share.

[15:12] The payoff for this kind of project is that you only maintain
what's really core to your project, and instead of replicating
information, you link out to the other people who are maintaining what's
core to their project, and benefit from their constantly updating and
curating that information.

[15:28] The challenge, though, for people coming into this area is
they don't know those vocabularies. You have to actually become
acquainted with different communities working with different standards,
and understand how they describe the objects and information that
they're curating. That's probably the biggest challenge for someone new
coming into this area.

**Steve**:  [15:48] Yeah, that's true. In some cases, there are very
rich vocabularies that are already developed. For example, we have been
looking a lot at the Getty Thesaurus of Geographic Names, which is a
massive database about places and their names.

[16:08] That's actually a resource that both the Chinese Temple
project and my Biodiversity Informatics project could draw from the same
basically vocabulary of place names and ways of describing geographic
subdivisions and things like that. If there is something like that
that's already developed, then the challenge is linking your data to it.
In some cases, there aren't really good vocabularies that you can use.

[16:42] In that case, the challenge is really a social challenge,
which is how do you develop a consensus among the various parties that
have a vested interest in using a vocabulary like that, how do you go
through that community process to develop a consensus or even a standard
vocabulary for describing things in a machine‑readable way.

[17:11] I've been fairly heavily involved in that with TDWG, this
organization that I work with, in trying to get a consensus on what
terms are we going to use to describe different things, and how are we
going to link things together and so on.

**Cliff**:  [17:30] Let's turn to the use of the Semantic Web and
Linked Data as educational technology, because one of the really
promising possibilities you have for graduate students is to become
involved in those communities and to learn how the communities describe
the objects that they're talking about, which is a really powerful way
to become acquainted with the field.

**Steve**:  [17:55] I think the first challenge is to figure out who
are the people who are working on the same kind of issues as you are and
do they already have the semantic web or link data effort. As we've been
working on this project, we have discovered resources that are relevant.

[18:20] For example a group that's developing descriptions of periods
of time like Chinese dynasties, and groups that are developing gadget
tiers of historical locations that may be don't even exist anymore, and
so to pin in, there's people working on archeology and pretty much all
of the different sorts of fields within the humanities and natural
sciences. There's probably a community that's already working on
developing some kind of standards or consensus vocabularies, if you can
find out what they are.

[19:01] The payoff is that you...it's essentially the network effect
which is that if you connect your information to someone else's
information, then you end up with something that is greater than the sum
of the parts, which sounds impossible but that's where the Semantic Web
part of it comes in.

[19:30] We didn't really talk about that, but one of the layers that
gets overlaid on top of the Linked Data is that the descriptions that
you have of things which are done in little units called RDF triples.
It's not just a method of, say, marking up your data. Those data
actually are considered to have meaning.

[20:06] The Semantic Web basically indicates that you can combine
different bits of information, and those bits of information may entail
other information that no one is actually directly asserted. If you
combine data, there's a potential that a machine could essentially learn
new information that wasn't stated by anyone. That's the promise of this
Semantic Web.

[20:37] How effective that has happened is questionable. People have
been basically dreaming about this for over 10 years. It hasn't
developed at nearly the speed as a human readable web. I don't know if
you want to talk about some reasons for that.

**Cliff**:  [20:58] Why not? What are the downsides here, or the
impediments, maybe it's better to say?

**Steve**:  [21:03] There are probably two major reasons why the
Semantic Web has not developed as fast as people thought it would. The
first one has to do with what I talked about it the context of Linked
Data.

[21:20] It's really important that once you describe or once you
denote something with URI, that URI shouldn't go away. Many people have
had the experience where they bookmarked the URL and then someone
decided, "Oh, I don't like the way we organized this." We reorganize our
company, so we're changing all our URLs to reflect our company's
reorganization and then basically that link gets broken.

[21:52] If you're going to use URIs to represent things, you have to
carefully think out how you are going to keep those URIs stable over a
very long period of time. If it's information that you control and is
fairly well contained like, for example, the Getty Thesaurus is run by
the Getty organization, so they can decide on what URIs are going to use
and keep those stable.

[22:24] If you have things that are more like the community resource,
then coming up with some consensus on how the community is going to keep
those URIs stable is really challenging. There's a number of different
approaches that people have taken.

[22:41] For example, the DOIs which are very widespread in the library
community is a very successful and widely acceptable solution for the
problem of keeping identifier stable, but in my community, in the
Biodiversity Informatics' community, there is not that sort of
consensus. That is probably the major reason why there hasn't been a lot
of progress there.

[23:09] The other part of it has to do with talking common language.
We touched on this earlier when we were talking about standardized
vocabularies. One of the principles of Linked Data in the Semantic Web
is that anyone can say anything about any topic. That's true, you can
say anything you want in machine‑readable language. The question is, is
any other machine going to understand what you said?

[23:43] If you don't have consensus set of properties that everyone in
the community is going to use to describe the resources that they're
interested in, then if you don't have a consensus, you'll end up with 10
people each describing the same kinds of objects in 10 different ways.

[24:07] That makes it impossible to aggregate those data into a
combined dataset that would allow you to make the discoveries that I was
talking about before where you learn new things because of combining
other people's data.

[24:26] That's another problem that is going to have to be dealt with.
Different communities are at different places in terms of their success
in defining vocabularies, and then also something we haven't touched a
point is graph models which is probably beyond the scope of this
podcast, but I guess Suellen talked about that in an earlier, one of
your podcast.

**Cliff**:  [24:56] We did. We had a podcast on Neo4j and graph
databases.

**Steve**:  [25:00] Maybe I should just refer you to the other podcast
and say that developing the third piece besides consensus on how to
handle URI identifiers, common vocabulary, and then a common graph model
within your domain and interest.

[25:20] Those are the three major issues that a community has to come
to [inaudible] with before you can get synergies that the people who
envisioned the Semantic Web thought was going to happen fairly quickly.

**Cliff**:  [25:38] If I were someone coming totally fresh to this
Semantic Web, where do you think the best place is for me to get
started? Let's say, I'm a student, I'm interested in learning what's
going on in my field. Where would you recommend someone to look first?

**Steve**:  [25:56] That's a good question. The W3C, which is the
World Wide Web Consortium, has a number of documents about different
parts of the Semantic Web such as RDF, and usually they have very
technical specifications. They also generally have user's guide and
those are usually fairly accessible with examples and things like that.

[26:26] I have to say it's not an easy thing to just go and learn
about on your own. I mean, there are books and they often have examples
in them, but in order to try out the examples and actually do something
with what you are creating, there's a technological barrier in terms of
installing the kinds of software that you would need to make it run.

[26:56] I would advise people to find a group of people who are doing
this kind of thing and then get involved with them because especially if
there are some technically minded people in the group who've already
dealt with some of the issues of setting up query‑able, end point, and
things like that, then it would be easier for you to try out or test out
the things you're interested in in the context of what they've already
developed.

**Cliff**:  [27:27] Yeah, I would second that. This is of course the
group that I referred to in the beginning. We have here called the
Semantic Lab Working Group which brings together people from all fields
across Vanderbilt. Anyone listening to this podcast who wants more
information about how that group works, we have a website which I'll put
up in the show notes.

[27:49] We'd also be happy to talk to you about setting up a group at
your own institution. I think developing the community aspect, because
people come in with lots of different skills, some technological, some
more on the meditated side, it's good to have librarians involved and
you need subject specialists.

[28:05] It is an interdisciplinary community that you need to develop
to make this work at its maximum promise.

**Steve**:  [28:13] I thought about this whole issue of how do you get
somewhere with Linked Data and the Semantic Web. If you think back, Tim
Berners‑Lee at some point in time made the first web page.

[28:27] When he did that, there was only one and it was fairly useless
until there were more than one that were connected together, so really
involved developing the infrastructure of servers and the protocol for
communicating information, but then people had to make web pages and had
to link them together. Until that happened, there wasn't this kind of
network effect.

[28:49] The same thing you could say about Twitter, there was a first
tweet but until there were more than one person on Twitter, that tweet
didn't go anywhere. That's why the social aspect of this is so
important.

[29:02] Bioimages is cool that it has this layer underneath it, but
unless there's 10, 100, or 1000 Bioimages, they are talking the same
kind of language and they are linked together, there really isn't much
of a benefit of it over the more conventional technology. That's another
reason why it's taken this technology a while to get off.

[29:32] There is a growing commitment to Linked Data and the Semantic
Web, we've seen that in places like the Library of Congress and other
organizations who basically, even the DOI organization which provides
Linked Data service for all its identifiers.

[29:52] We see some rather large players making commitments to this
and I think that eventually may result in making it easier for more
people to participate and for the network effect to take off in the same
way that it did in other commonly used things like the World Wide Web
and Twitter.

**Cliff**:  [30:14] When we end our conversation, there we can talk a
lot longer, but this is a great interaction to the Semantic Web and
Linked Data, and the uses it has on university campus. Before I close,
we always ask our guest, what is your favorite analogue educational
technology?

**Steve**:  [30:30] It would have to probably be a pencil and a piece
of paper. I have students who have for assignments to draw things like a
cloning vector plasmid. I see them struggling, trying to draw and label
circles on their computer. I often suggest, "Why don't you draw it with
a pencil on a piece of a paper, and then you could always take a picture
of it with your phone?"

[30:59] There's still something to be said for a pencil and paper,
although, I have been trying to ban myself from pieces of paper because
I have a bad habit of losing them. There is that downside.

**Cliff**:  [31:13] Files get lost, too, from time to time. Listen,
thanks a lot, Steve. I really appreciate it. Great to have you on.

**Steve**:  [31:18] Thanks.

[31:18] [background music]

**Derek**:  [31:19] That was Steve Baskauf, Senior Lecturer in
Biological Sciences, interviewed by Cliff Anderson from the Vanderbilt
Library. In the show notes, you'll find links to the Bioimages project,
the Vanderbilt Arboretum Tree Tours, and the library's Working Group on
Linked Data and the Semantic Web.

[31:36] You'll also find a link to Steve's Instagram account, VU
Trees, where he posts some pretty incredible photos of Vanderbilt's
campus foliage. You can find those show notes on our website,
leadinglinespod.com, and on our Twitter where our handle is
@leadinglinespod.

[31:51] Leading Lines is produced by the Center for Teaching, the
Vanderbilt Institute for Digital Learning, and the Office of Scholarly
Communications, as well as the Associate Provost for Digital Learning.
Look for new episodes, the first and third Monday of each month, except
next month. We're taking the first Monday in January off for the
holidays.

[32:06] Our next episode will be available Monday, January 16th. I'm
your host, Derek Bruff. Thanks for listening.

[32:11] [background music]
