---
layout: post
title:  "Episode 023: Eric Schmalz"
date:   2017-08-21
excerpt: "Eric Schmalz of the U.S. Holocaust Museum talks about the History Unfolded citizen history project."
episode: true
tag:
- citizen history
- Students as Producers
- crowdsourcing
comments: true
---

In this episode, we interview Eric Schmalz, Citizen History Community Manager at the U.S. Holocaust Museum. Eric works with the museum’s History Unfolded project. That project aims to investigate what Americans knew about the Holocaust as it was happening during World War II, and how Americans reacted to news of the Holocaust. The museum calls History Unfolded a “citizen history” project, in the style of crowd-sourced citizen science projects like Galaxy Zoo or FoldIt. Regular people are invited to find newspaper articles from the 30s and 40s, either online or at our local libraries, ones that reference the Holocaust, and contribute them to an online database. So far, the project has collected over 8,000 articles!

Eric Schmalz was on Vanderbilt’s campus for the Cultural Heritage at Scale symposium, organized by Vanderbilt and the Council on Library and Information Sciences. He was interviewed by Gayathri Narasimham, associate director of the Vanderbilt Institute for Digital Learning. There’s a really interesting education angle here, since History Unfolded works with high school teachers and college professors to involve students in the project. Gayathri talks explores that educational angle with Eric in the interview. 

Links
<ul>
<li><a href="https://newspapers.ushmm.org/">History Unfolded</a></li>
<li><a href="https://newspapers.ushmm.org/blog/">Above the Fold, the History Unfolded blog</a></li>
<li><a href="http://twitter.com/eric_ushmm">@Eric_USHMM on Twitter</a></li>
<li><a href="http://heritage-at-scale.info/">Cultural Heritage at Scale symposium</a></li>
<li><a href="http://derekbruff.org/?p=2579">Derek Bruff’s 2013 blog post on crowdsourcing and MOOCs</a></li>
</ul>

<iframe width="100%" height="450" scrolling="no" frameborder="no" src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/338461607%3Fsecret_token%3Ds-fZZrM&amp;color=ff5500&amp;auto_play=false&amp;hide_related=false&amp;show_comments=true&amp;show_user=true&amp;show_reposts=false&amp;visual=true"></iframe>

## Episode 23: Eric Schmalz

[00:00] [background music]

**Derek Bruff**: [00:07] Welcome to "Leading Lines," a podcast on
educational technology from Vanderbilt University. I'm your host, Derek Bruff, the Director of the Vanderbilt center for Teaching.

[00:13] In this episode, we interviewed Eric Schmalz, Citizen History
Community Manager of the US Holocaust Museum. Eric works with the
museum's History Unfolded project.

[00:23] That project aims to investigate what Americans knew about the
Holocaust as it was happening during World War II and how Americans
reacted to news of the Holocaust. The museum calls History Unfolded, a
Citizen History project, in the style of crowd sourced citizen science
projects like Galaxy Zoo or Folded.

[00:39] Folks looks like you and me are invited to find newspaper
articles from the '30s and '40s, either online or at our local
libraries, ones that references the Holocaust and then contribute them
to an online database.

[00:49] So far, the project has collected over 8,000 such articles.
Eric Schmalz was on Vanderbilt's campus recently for the "[Cultural
Heritage at Scale](http://heritage-at-scale.info/)" symposium, organized by Vanderbilt and the Council on
Library and Information Sciences.

[01:03] He was interviewed by Gayathri Narasimham, Associate Director
of the Vanderbilt Institute for Digital Learning. There's a really
interesting education angle here, since History Unfolded works with high
school teachers and college professors to involve students in the
project. Gayathri talks about that educational angle with Eric in the
interview.

[01:20] [background music]

**Gayathri Narasimham**:  [01:22] Hi, I'm talking today with Eric
Schmalz, who is Citizen's History Community Manager at the William
Levine Family Institute for Holocaust Education.

[01:31] Hi, Eric. How are you doing?

**Eric Schmalz**:  [01:35] I'm doing very well. How are you?

**Gayathri**:  [01:38] I'm doing well, thank you. Like I mentioned to
you, this is a podcast on educational technology. We are particularly
interested in how folks are using technology in their educational
enterprises, and how you use it in your teaching in classes, and so on.

[01:57] Tell us a bit about what you do, what you're doing currently,
and how that would fit, keeping in mind this particular aspect of
educational technology for this podcast.

**Eric**:  [02:12] I work at the United States Holocaust Memorial
Museum in Washington DC. That is the national museum for the country,
and I work on a digital project called History Unfolded. It is a
newspapers project. We're asking people around the country to look in
their local newspaper collections, to see how their towns reported on
certain events of the Holocaust.

[02:36] This newspapers project started with an authentic research
question that we've had at the museum, which is, what did Americans have
the opportunity to know about the Holocaust as it occurred and how did
Americans respond?

[02:51] History Unfolded is a stand‑alone website. It's actually not
part of the main museum's website even though we link to it. It was
created as a way to allow people around the country to help us answer
this question of, what did Americans have the opportunity to know?

**Gayathri**:  [03:10] How do you frame this in your educational
content? Do you have classes in the museum or do you go to schools? Do
you talk with students of different ages? What do you do?

**Eric**:  [03:26] Yes. What's been really interesting for us to see
about this project is we originally intended to target just high school
students, but History Unfolded has been attractive and has been
implemented in classes from the middle school level, all the way up
through university graduate students who are doing research on it.

[03:49] We've also had involvement with lifelong learners, including
some Holocaust survivors who have wanted to do this kind of work. There
really is a wide variety of participation as some of those college
students do come through.

[04:06] I spoke with a group at Shippensburg University in
Pennsylvania, for instance, and they were really excited to be a part of
History Unfolded.

**Gayathri**:  [04:15] Awesome. The museum is located in DC and you
have students coming through to the museum. What about the students who
are not able to come to DC? Do you engage with them online? Do you have
programs that you're working with them, and they are using other means
of reaching them?

**Eric**:  [04:37] One of the greatest parts about History Unfolded,
you don't actually need to come to Washington DC to be involved.

[04:44] We're asking people to look in their local newspaper
collections, so if they find out about the project in other places, they
can do the work, upload their article findings to our website, and
really be a part of this ongoing research effort without ever stepping
foot inside Washington DC.

**Gayathri**:  [05:03] Tell us about History Unfolded. What does it
involve? It's not a course. It's more like a research project and so a
student who is interested is going to be able to contribute to that
research.

[05:20] Is that going to be evaluated? Is that part of a credit
bearing course in some universities, or is it part of some other
research project that will end up in a publication or some longer
lasting product than just the research and just what they contribute?

**Eric**:  [05:40] The story of History Unfolded begins by talking
first about what Citizen History is. My title at the museum, as you
mentioned, is Citizen History Community Manager.

[05:53] A number of people may be familiar with citizen science, which
has been around for several hundred years, where scientists would get
people in the community to look into particular aspects of data
collection.

[06:07] They would compile all of that and they would make some
inference or conclusion based on that data. What we're doing here at the
Holocaust Museum is we're applying that same principle to history.

[06:22] As a Citizen History project, we are asking the authentic
historical question of, what did Americans have the opportunity to know
about the Holocaust as it occurred?" We're asking that question because
there exists gaps in our knowledge, our current knowledge.

[06:38] As some people probably can think of right now, it's a
question that comes up in everyday life. Some people assume, "Well,
Americans didn't necessarily know anything about the Holocaust," or,
"I'm not sure to what extent people knew about the Holocaust. Did they
know in 1933 when the Nazis came to power or did they only know at the
end of the war?"

[07:05] This is part of our larger initiative on Americans and Nazi
threat that we're doing at the museum. We, as an institution, wanted to
know, what did Americans have the opportunity to know about these events
as they occurred?

[07:19] We had several options for exploring those questions. Our
staff is limited. We simply can't do it all ourselves in terms of our
researchers.

[07:29] In addition, we realize there's a great opportunity here for
people in the community all over the country to actually get their hands
on doing real historical research and learning from that, having an
experience where maybe their assumptions about the Holocaust are
challenged.

[07:48] We realize that a citizen history project would be an
excellent fit for helping us answer this question in terms of getting
support that we couldn't do all on our own and in terms of an
educational benefit.

[08:01] That's what really makes a Citizen History project a little
distinct from crowdsourcing. In crowdsourcing, yes, there's benefits to
the individual volunteers, but the main focus is on acquisition and
collection end goals.

[08:18] Whereas in Citizen History, part of the focus is also on the
educational experience itself. The members of the community will
consider what their collection is right like in their hometown. The best
advice we give them is, "Contact your local librarian."

[08:36] For instance, here in Nashville, Tennessee, I would recommend
to a teacher to have his or her students contact their school librarian
or maybe a librarian here such as at Vanderbilt and say, "Could you
please tell me about your collections in the 1930s and '40s. We're
looking for events of the Holocaust that happened in Europe and also
American reactions back at home."

[09:02] Once the students or the volunteers realize what collections
they have access to, then they will go through those newspaper
collections. They will look for articles relevant to our 31 events for
research.

**Gayathri**:  [09:18] Can you explain what 31 events are? Is that a
set number of events that you're focusing on in this particular
research?

**Eric**:  [09:26] Correct. Our 31 events for research are some events
that occurred as part of the larger narrative of the Holocaust itself in
Europe. One of those would be the annexation of Austria by the Nazi
regime.

[09:43] Another one would be Kristallnacht in November of 1938, the
pogroms and persecution against Jews. There's also events such as the
Allied condemnation of the Final Solution in late 1942, and the
"discovery" of the camps in 1945.

[10:08] We're also asking people to look for events in terms of what
was going on in the United States at the time for context. For instance,
the US was dealing with the depression. Tendency is towards isolationism
versus interventionism.

[10:25] We are asking for people that consider events such as the
Selective Service Act and FDR's call for troops during peace time. We're
asking people to consider Marian Anderson and the Daughters of the
American Revolution banning her from singing at Constitution Hall and
her decision to sing at the Lincoln Memorial instead, so we can
understand what were race relations like in the United States at the
time.

[10:58] We're also focusing on Japanese interment as we say Japanese
incarceration with the Executive Order that was passed in early 1942, to
basically relocate Japanese‑Americans from the coast to interior parts
of the country and to understand about the fear and some of the
decisions going on within the country.

[11:22] What researchers do is they consider those events. We have
really good pages on our website that describe those events as a
background, so people don't have to be an expert in them. They provide
keywords for doing online research, or they chitchat that are good for
online research and microfilm research.

[11:44] The next step once you determined what newspaper questions are
available to you and what event you want to research is to actually go
and do the research.

[11:56] The two main ways are either on microfilm at the library which
sounds...so I could be [inaudible] it's actually exciting for a lot of
our participants or online digital collections. They take an image of
the article that they find, upload the image, and type in the metadata
that we're after, which would be...

**Gayathri**:  [12:21] I just had a question about the metadata but
I'll let you explain what particular tags you're looking for and things
like that form part of your metadata.

**Eric**:  [12:31] We are interested in the metadata of the newspaper
headline, the sub headline, the page number, the author or byline and
the issue date, and a few other details on our website in part, because
our main goal for this project is to try to understand if there are
trends around the country in terms of article contribution.

[12:57] In a dream world, if we are really successful, and we get
thousands and thousands of submissions from around the country,
researchers are curious and we are curious to know how many stories
about Holocaust were on page one versus in interior pages.

[13:10] How many stories about the Holocaust mentioned the word Jews
specifically, or perhaps use of words like refugees, or Europeans more
generally? We want to know how many of our articles were byline versus
were not?

[13:26] We're also interested in the type of article at hand. Was it
an editorial? Was it a letter to the editor or a political cartoon? Was
it a news article? This goes to the question you had asked earlier about
what is happening with all these data.

[13:45] Well, first off, once the articles are approved by me and I
checked the data that is entered with the image that is supplied, to
make sure it's accurate and to make sure that the article is relevant to
one of our 31 events. After I do that and approved the article, it
becomes immediately available to the general public.

[14:07] If you, for those who are listening, for anyone who is
interested, if you are to go and research your local newspaper paper and
submit an article to our website, fairly soon, we will review it and if
it is accepted into our website, anybody with Internet access around the
world will be able to look at that data that you put in and the preview
of the image that you sent to our website.

**Gayathri**:  [14:31] How do you verify that the information that is
given to you is actually authentic, that it is not just relevant to the
particular project? How do you go about saying, "OK, what's described
here it's verifiable. It's true"?

**Eric**:  [14:50] A very particular story comes to mind, and if you
go to our website and go to Menu and then History Unfolded blog, you can
actually read the story.

[15:01] It's about a Jewish lawyer in Munich in 1933, who was beaten
up by Nazis in the streets because of his involvement defending people,
and the fact that he was a known Jew, and he was forced by the people
who beat him up to wear a sign around in the city.

[15:25] There are photos of this as it occurred. Newspapers got access
to these photos or some versions of the photos. The language on the sign
was not clear in some of the images. You actually can see in some of the
newspaper articles that the words vary slightly depending on the
publication.

[15:51] His name, for instance, changes on some of the stories and
reports and more information does come out. We wrote a blog post in
order to clarify some of that information, but in itself, the tracking
of the information that came out of the newspapers and seeing some of
those nuances and differences is an important lesson to learn as well.

[16:14] We combine the here's to reporting and what our project is
doing is reviewing what was reported and what people had access to at
the time with our knowledge as an institution, where on our event pages,
you can go and read about the actual history as well and to make sure
that the real story is coming across.

**Gayathri**:  [16:36] My questions is then, you probably have several
instances of the same story being reported in slightly different ways or
even in the same way, but how do you collate all that information?

[16:50] If there's a particular story that has multiple sources, they
all are gathered together. Do you tag them? Do you have ways of doing
that because it's all coming in through your Citizen researchers, and
they maybe not all have the same ways of tagging it?

**Eric**:  [17:06] This is a great question and one that we're really
interested in. What we have done is, on our website, once the
information is entered and the article is approved, it is not only
available to anyone with an Internet connection but it goes in for the
public and the database, and it's searchable.

[17:31] We have on our Menu on the website, you can browse the
newspaper information.

[17:37] One thing we've been curious about is, how were particular
stories told similarly or differently in different parts of the country
or maybe even in the same town from different newspapers?

[17:51] In our advanced search feature, you can look by a particular
date. For instance, if I'm curious about how Kristallnacht was reported
in Tennessee for instance, I can look in November 9th or November 10th,
1938 and I can search by the state of Tennessee and see what were the
headlines like in a different city.

[18:14] I may also know this if an article came out in two different
cities that was on the exact same day and was from the same wire
service. Perhaps, the story itself is the same but the headline changed.
Some of those decisions were made by editors of the newspapers
themselves, also where the articles were placed on the page or in what
page.

[18:38] Those are also things you can start to gather from our website
by using our advance search feature. There's a key word search. You can
search by event. You can search by the wire service itself, "Associated
Press" or "United Press." Everything that is entered in is searchable in
those manners. There's a lot that you can actually do with the data once
it's entered in.

**Gayathri**:  [19:05] You've had college students coming and working
with you. What aspects of this do you teach in this situation? Do you
have classes? Do you show them how to do this? It is not just applicable
in this particular instance but it's also a way of curating information
about a lot of different things.

[19:29] I'm just asking you, if you've had an opportunity to go beyond
the Holocaust and the events around that but also in other ways and
different kinds of events that could be happening.

[19:44] Citizen journalism is another thing that's happening as we
speak and so many things are happening around the ways that citizens
report, but when we come to universities and classes and college
students, there are particular ways of doing research and reporting, so
I was wondering about your take on that.

**Eric**:  [20:01] We are facilitating for the high school teachers or
the university professors or even the middle school teachers in terms of
what they know is most important for their students in the classroom.

[20:18] In conversations with them, we try to be very aware of the
greatest needs because, again, as a Citizen History project, one of our
goals is to make sure our project has a strong educational benefit in
the classroom as well.

[20:36] Our educators tell us that their students need to improve
their media literacy skills. That is very important to them, especially
in the world that we live in today.

[20:43] One of the great things about History Unfolded project is that
it does this. Students are forced to read newspapers, and a lot of the
times, they really enjoy reading these newspapers in the 1930s and '40s
and understand how newspapers are put together.

[20:59] We have a resource on the website we created based on feedback
from teachers that students struggled reading historic newspapers, and
so it goes, piece by piece, and tells them, "Here are the parts of the
newspaper and here's how you read it."

[21:15] For a lot of our English teachers or for Journalism teachers
that are interested in History Unfolded, they come to this project
because they know their students are going to hone their skills in terms
of critical reading and analysis.

[21:32] In addition to that, especially from the history side, high
school teachers and university professors want students to understand
what it is to do real history. We constantly hear about how students
don't enjoy just reading through the textbook and teachers don't enjoy
just teaching through the textbook. They want to go beyond that.

[21:50] What History Unfolded offers them is the opportunity to be a
part of authentic historical research. That's very motivating for
students. They know what busy work is and they can see it when they are
given busy work, but here they are given a real opportunity to do
historical research on an ongoing question and that's very exciting for
them. They are also being able to see how it is that history is made.

[22:18] By looking at the microfilm with your classmates, collecting
all this data and then talking about it, they are involved in that
active process of trying to understand the past to make sense of it.

[22:33] Like we mentioned, about the nuances of trying to understand
the stories and where they're coming from and the question of accuracy
is something that students do need to consider today as well.

[22:48] I'll also add that some teachers have very much had their
students consider current events today. We had a group of seniors in
Minnesota, high school seniors that did a project around History
Unfolded for their Senior Capstone Project. They created a website of
their own, which is very exciting.

[23:11] They compared the Refugee Crisis in the 1930s to the crisis in
Syria today. They made their own conclusion between the two projects.
They were using data from History Unfolded that they had researched and
from the Holocaust Museum's website to understand the context of how
people reacted and why they reacted then, to understand how a lot of
people react today.

[23:36] What I thought most exciting is to take it a step further and
to call for some kind of action. They presented two members of their
local community including those in power and said, "Based on the lessons
of the past, here's what we see is going on today and here are things we
recommend that you do differently."

[23:54] Those are all skills that students are really getting from
this project and the teachers are really excited about.

**Gayathri**:  [24:04] Do you see a difference in the way news is
reported back then versus now and all that has impacted the use of
technology in this situation?

**Eric**:  [24:10] Yes. There's a clear difference that we've seen as
the project team and as the students often tell us that they see in the
newspapers of the past. One of the main differences in terms of how
newspapers were organized as physical papers that often had clear
sections to them.

[24:35] One of the things in our conversations with student that we
often try to tell them is, "Well, a consideration for you if a newspaper
doesn't appear to page two or three, what section in the newspaper is
it? It's at a section where all events typically occurred? Therefore,
would it necessarily be unusual for an event like this to be on page
three, for instance, instead of page one?"

[25:02] We have students understand in terms of editorial sections in
the newspapers as well, which will typically be on a same page or where
the political cartoons were likely to be and Letters to The Editor.

[25:14] Whereas, today, news may come up in many different ways in
terms of on your phone or looking at a website. The presentation of the
articles may vary in terms of how students are accessing it, but at the
same time, there are some lessons that are very similar regardless,
which is, just because a story exists how in the world, does it
necessarily mean that someone would come across it and how do they come
across it?

[25:44] For instance, if a student is looking at an article on page
one, at the very bottom of the page, if they're skimming through the top
of the page, they may or may not see it. Whereas, a student looking
online at the home page of a website, may not see all the articles on
that page either, or in terms of reading those articles.

[26:07] If you read an article about a situation, say, about the
refugee situation today, you may have particular feelings. You may take
action, but are those actions always recorded back in the paper? Yes or
no? These are other lessons for our students to consider.

[26:26] When I mentioned earlier about what our project is able to do
is to help answer the question of what did Americans have the
opportunity to know and how did some people react. That's really what
we're doing. We're trying to understand what was available in terms of
information and access to information.

[26:44] It's not always very easy to figure out in terms of people's
minds and people's responses in every case what they actually did, if
anything.

**Gayathri**:  [26:58] This has been great but I want to know if you
had some key moments. You mentioned about this one article which was
about a person being beaten up and that was reported differently. Do you
recall any other significant events or pieces that you might wish to
share, that showcases the technology and how you used it?

**Eric**:  [27:24] I think some of the most fascinating articles that
we found is from the "Historical Black Press." We have different
educators, especially a professor out at Arizona State University,
Matthew Delmont, who did a research right around History Unfolded about
a year ago.

[27:44] He had his students research on ProQuest, so using modern
technology today, from newspapers all over the country even though his
students were in Arizona.

[27:54] They were specifically looking at the reactions in the
African‑American community to the Holocaust as opposed to the mainstream
newspapers of the primarily white audience in terms of readers. The
difference that we saw in a lot of those reports was striking to us.

[28:15] For instance, we had some students that sent us political
cartoons and editorials from members of the African‑American community
that said, "Yes, while we are very sympathetic to the plight of refugees
in Europe and the Jews who are being persecuted, we also recognize a
great hypocrisy about the own violence that is occurring in our country
including lynchings and other threats to the livelihood of
African‑Americans here."

"[28:51] If we're going to be helping out those of our brothers and
sisters in Europe, why are we not also trying to help out our brothers
and sisters here in the country?" That's one example that comes to mind.

**Gayathri**:  [29:06] Before we end, we ask our participants a
question and that is, what is your favorite analog technology? You do so
much with digital, so what is your favorite analog?

**Eric**:  [29:20] Well, this is easy for me to answer in terms of the
project, and I think a little bit more in terms of personally but I
think it would be fitting to talk about how the old microfilm readers
are themselves analog technology. The students that have worked on this
project are really fascinated to use it and we did not expect that to be
the case.

[29:48] We thought, with all the emphasis on smartphones and tablets
and computers, the students would find it archaic and boring but they
don't. They really enjoy the hands‑on experience and we really enjoy
seeing them use that hands‑on experience.

[30:08] To be able to combine that analog hands‑on technology with the
digital website and in some cases, digital readers that can do PDFs or
JPEGs is really exciting for us.

[30:20] Personally, I remember as a student in college, when I was
doing research for the very first time, I was using the old‑fashioned
microfilm readers and I also found that really exciting.

[30:33] The favorite technology for me in terms of this project is
we're really asking high school students to do research that a lot of
times, they're not going to be asked to do either ever or, if they're a
history major or, maybe, a journalism student, they may do in college or
graduate school.

[30:54] It really is a great technology. For this project, it's been
very engaging.

**Gayathri**:  [30:59] Thank you.

[30:59] [background music]

**Gayathri**:  [31:01] Thank you so much, Eric Schmalz. Thank you for
talking with me, today.

**Derek**:  [31:06] That was Eric Schmalz, Citizen History Community
Manager at the US Holocaust Museum, interviewed by Gayathri Narasimham
of the Vanderbilt Institute for Digital Learning. I'm really impressed
with the History Unfolded project.

[31:16] It reminds me of some of the work educators have been doing
with Wikipedia, helping students contribute to the online encyclopedia.
You can see our interviews with Tim Foster and Carwil Bjork‑James in
episodes 13 and 14 for examples of that kind of work.

[31:30] I'm also reminded of some of the early promise of MOOCs,
Massive Open Online Courses. These courses involve thousands of people,
all interested in learning about the same topic.

[31:38] Most of the courses consisted of lecture videos,
multiple‑choice quizzes, and discussion boards, which were all fine, but
imagine a course on the Holocaust that partnered with History Unfolded.
You might have 5,000 or 10,000 people learning about the Holocaust as
they contributed to this Citizen History project.

[31:54] I know a couple of MOOCs that went in this direction, but I
think it was a missed opportunity, particularly for the digital
humanities community already familiar with crowdsource research, that we
didn't see more MOOCs like that.

[32:05] In the show notes, you'll find a link to History Unfolded and
some related resources. I encourage you to think about ways that you
might contribute to the project with your students.

[32:14] You'll find those show notes on our website,
leadinglinespod.com. We welcome your comments and questions there and on
Twitter, where our handle is @leadinglinespod.

[32:22] You can subscribe to our podcasts through iTunes or your other
favorite podcast app. If you like what you hear on the podcast, please
leave us a rating and review on iTunes. That really helps other
listeners find the show, given how iTunes algorithms work.

[32:33] Leading Lines is produced by the Center for Teaching, the
Vanderbilt Institute for Digital Learning, the Office of Scholarly
Communications, and the Associate Provost for Digital Learning. This
episode was edited by Rhett McDaniel. Look for new episodes the first
and third Monday of each month.

[32:46] [background music]

**Derek**:  [32:46] I'm your host, Derek Bruff. Thanks for listening.


