---
layout: post
title:  "Episode 025: Elizabeth Self"
date:   2017-09-18
excerpt: "Elizabeth Self, lecturer in teaching and learning at Vanderbilt University, talks about her video-enhanced teacher simulation project."
episode: true
tag:
- video
- simulation
- intercultural competence
comments: true
---

In this episode we talk with Elizabeth Self, a teacher educator at Vanderbilt University in the Peabody College of Education and Human Development. Stacey Johnson, Assistant Director for Educational Technology at the Center for Teaching, talked with Liz about her clinical simulation project, in which preservice teachers role-play with actors the kinds of interactions they might have one day as teachers with students, parents, and colleagues. Liz shares why these simulations are such powerful learning experiences for her students, and the specific ways that technology, particularly video technology, enhances those learning experiences. 

Links

<ul><li><a href="https://my.vanderbilt.edu/elizabethself/">Elizabeth Self's faculty page</a></li>
<li><a href="https://twitter.com/elizabethaself">@elizabethaself</a> on Twitter</li>
<li><a href="http://www.edweek.org/ew/articles/2016/02/17/for-preservice-teachers-lessons-on-cultural-sensitivity.html">"For Preservice Teachers, Lessons on Cultural Sensitivity"</a>, an Education Week story profiling Elizabeth Self's project</li>
</ul>

<iframe width="100%" height="300" scrolling="no" frameborder="no" src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/342496358&amp;color=%23ff5500&amp;auto_play=false&amp;hide_related=false&amp;show_comments=true&amp;show_user=true&amp;show_reposts=false&amp;visual=true"></iframe>

## Episode 25: Elizabeth Self

[00:00] [background music]

**Derek Bruff**: [00:02] Welcome to "Leading Lines," a podcast from
Vanderbilt University. I am your host, Derek Bruff, the director of the
Vanderbilt Center for Teaching.

[00:12] In this podcast, we explore creative, intentional and
effective uses of technology to enhance student learning, uses the point
that way to the future of educational technology in college and
university settings.

[00:22] In this episode, we talk with Elizabeth Self, a teacher
educator here at the Vanderbilt University in the Peabody College of
Education and Human Development.

[00:31] My Center for Teaching colleague, Stacey Johnson talks with
Liz about her clinical simulation project in which pre‑service teachers
role play with actors in the kinds of interactions they might one day
have as teachers with students, parents, and colleagues.

[00:43] Liz shares why these simulations are such powerful learning
experiences for her students, and the specific ways that technology,
particularly video technology enhances these learning experiences.

[00:54] [background music]

**Stacey Johnson**:  [00:54] I am so excited to be here today for this
episode of Leading Lines with Liz Self from Peabody College here at
Vanderbilt. Liz, tell us a little bit about your position here, and what
population you work with, and what you teach.

**Elizabeth Self**:  [01:10] Sure. Thank you for having me.

**Stacey**:  [01:11] My pleasure.

**Elizabeth**:  [01:12] I am a lecturer in the Department of Teaching
and Learning. I've spent a long time in that department. I started at
Peabody as a master student in 2009 in the Learning, Diversity, and
Urban Studies program.

[01:25] I got to study with Rich Milner, who was the faculty member in
charge of that program to start with. I asked Rich while I was a master
student if he thought I could hang around as a doctoral student. He
seemed to be keen on that idea as well.

[01:42] I finished my master's and then started my PhD in 2010.
Unfortunately, while I was a doctoral student, Rich left. I started
working with Ilana Horn, who was my adviser when I finished.

[01:56] The project itself started out of my being the wife of a
doctor. I met my husband in college. We started dating. We dated through
medical school. While he was in medical school, I would be his patient
every once in a while, while he got ready for a standardized patient
encounter.

[02:15] I would have to pretend to have an illness and he would have
to practice going through the motions of diagnosing something. I
remember him trying to learn the steps to a neurological exam.

[02:27] I kept thinking, because I was teaching school at the time, "I
wonder what this looks like in teacher education." I went through my
teacher preparation classes prior to some of the newer restrictions. I
started teaching and I took a couple classes. I took the praxis. I
didn't have a traditional process of going through.

**Stacey**:  [02:49] Just to clarify, you actually, right out of
college, started teaching and were teaching for several years, and being
your husband's standardized patient, and then you decided to go back and
do your master's and doctoral work.

**Elizabeth**:  [03:00] Yeah.

[03:01] I taught high school in Virginia, and then I taught high
school in Chicago. We moved here for him to start working at Vanderbilt.
I was going to keep teaching school and I couldn't get a job.

[03:12] I said, "Louise, master's program looks really interesting,"
and applied and started. Because my interest was less in the content, I
was an English teacher. I love English, and books, and writing, and
communicating, but that's not what I wanted to spend a lot of time
studying in graduate school. The diversity in urban studies piece was
really what drew me and it became the heart of the work that I do.

**Stacey**:  [03:36] Excellent. Did your project have a name?

**Elizabeth**:  [03:39] We call it Clinical Simulations. We're working
on a better...

**Stacey**:  [03:43] Which is just the same thing they call it in
medical school, right?

**Elizabeth**:  [03:45] Yeah. That's the terminology they use. They
mostly call them standardized patient encounters, SPEs.

[03:52] It's a challenge to talk about them as far as the term or we
probably need a better name for the project, only because simulations in
education conjures a lot of things for people. Everything from
computerized games to help people learn physics, to testing out
scenarios via simulations, to what we're doing in terms of live actor
video recorded group debriefed clinical simulations.

**Stacey**:  [04:19] There's a lot to impact there. Why don't we start
at the beginning?

**Elizabeth**:  [04:21] Sure.

**Stacey**:  [04:22] Your clinical simulations, there were a lot of
keywords in your description, live actor, videotaped, group, debrief.
[laughs] Let's start at the beginning and work through all of it.

**Elizabeth**:  [04:34] Sure. The basic scenario is this, we take
usually pre‑service teachers and we put them in a moment of teaching.
The moments of teaching are chosen based on a lot of things. They come
out of the literature based on moments that we know teachers struggle
with. They come out of previous teachers critical incidents or moments
that they experienced that became really important to their professional
development.

[04:58] Also, from my own experience, or whoever is writing the
simulation, things that we experienced as teachers and felt like, "I
wished I've had a chance to think through that before I actually had to
do it as a teacher."

[05:11] We create a story. We have two parts to the story. One part is
what the pre‑service teacher gets and it just sets up the story. You're
a teacher at this school, this grade. It's this far into the school
year. Here's the student or group of students. Here's what's going on
with them. Here's why you're meeting with whoever you are today, whether
it's supposed to be the student, the parent, or co‑worker.

[05:33] The other half of the story goes to the actor, who's playing
the part of the student, the parent, or the co‑worker. As it happens in
teaching, that person has a lot more information available about what's
going on than the pre‑service teacher has.

[05:49] We put them in this moment. They basically read their part of
the story beforehand. We have them answer some questions ahead of time.
What do you think is going to happen? What is informing what you think
is going to happen? What do you think you'll do?

[06:03] They basically walk into a room that we setup to film in. They
are thrust into this moment of teaching. There's a student sitting there
who's waiting to talk with them, or a parent who's come and is angry
about something, or a co‑worker who's going to chat with them about some
previous students, or any of those things.

**Stacey**:  [06:22] The people that are waiting in the room are
actors who understand all the tangents the situation needs to take?

**Elizabeth**:  [06:30] Right. When we create the narrative for the
actor, there's a couple parts to it. One is, "Here's what you need to
know about the story that's happening and all of the information you
have that our pre‑service teachers don't and might want to find out from
you." Part of it is, "Here's all the things about who you are in the
world."

[06:48] Probably the most important thing that we do is try to give
them a sense of, "How is this person feeling in this moment and what are
the things that are shaping that?" As the scenario unfolds, if the
teacher does something we don't expect, they can try to respond as that
person, from the spirit of who they are.

**Stacey**:  [07:07] Awesome. I guess there's a lot more detail that
we could impact about what happens next. I know the teachers are
actually going into the room, and interacting with the actor, and having
that videotaped is only the first third of the process, maybe.

**Elizabeth**:  [07:21] It is. In one sense, it's not the most
important part because it's not really where the learning happens. On
the other hand, it's really important because it's what we leverage in
order to support that learning. The fact that it's video recorded is
really important in my mind and from what we understand so far.

[07:40] When teachers are experiencing these moments out in classrooms
and in schools, there's no recording of that. There's no way to go back
and explore what happened. The only record we have to rely on is the
memory of the teacher, which includes their lenses, and their
interpretations, and the memory of the other people who are involved
who, because of the way schools were setup, may not feel comfortable
communicating with their perceptions were at that time.

[08:08] We have this recording and we're able to have the teachers and
then us as the instructors look back and see what actually happened. Did
you say what you thought you said or did you say a version of it that
came out differently and possibly was heard differently by this person?

[08:26] Did you really listen to what the student told you? Did you so
focused on what you had to communicate that you totally missed the fact
that they just shared something really important or something really
deep and troublesome that you need to stop, and honor, and respond to in
that moment?

**Stacey**:  [08:42] I wish I had that as a parent. Where someone
would follow me around for the crisis moments and be like, "Do you
notice how you got really tensed and did not honor what your child just
said?" [laughs]

**Elizabeth**:  [08:52] I have an eight, a six, and a four‑year‑old.
As my kids get older, I just more and more talk about the overlap
between parenting and teaching. I very often tell teachers, "I'm giving
you a sense of what we know is good practice. I'm giving you a sense of
all the tools you have available to you in these moments and know that
95 percent of the time, I don't use them as a parent."

[09:14] You will fail, still. You will not make the decision you wish
you did a lot, but the goal is to be able to see that and to get better
at it.

**Stacey**:  [09:24] It's about the journey of improvement, not
necessarily getting it right.

**Elizabeth**:  [09:27] Yes. I'm not so much preparing them for the
moment when something actually going wrong in the classroom or when a
parent does come in angry. I'm hoping that these encounters more than
anything prepare them to be open to continuing to learn from and with
students, parents, and co‑workers.

[09:46] Many of the scenarios are also to prepare them how to respond
to those moments, but also just to develop this sense that, "Even when I
feel like I'm an expert teacher, I won't know everything I need to
know."

[09:58] When a parent comes in and says, "I want to share these things
with you because it's really important to who my child is," that they
will say, "Thank you. It means so much to me that you brought this in.
I'm going to take a look at this. Can I come back to you if I have
questions?"

[10:11] I would feel like we've [laughs] been at least partially
successful if our teachers did that every time.

**Stacey**:  [10:17] I think that's amazing. It's a really human
approach to teaching teaching. We're not teaching you to enact a set of
skills perfectly every time or teaching you to interact with complex
people who have their own stuff.

**Elizabeth**:  [10:32] I think that's a big part of what confuses
people or concerns people when they first hear about the scenarios.

[10:40] I think that scholars in the diversity and acuity world, in my
field in particular, when they first hear about it, think that either
we're trying to prepare them for almost a script, "Here's how you would
deal with this moment of teaching," or that we are doing it in a way
that dehumanizes and really removes that complex human element from it.

[11:02] The way that we've set it up is to say, "We can't prepare you
for every situation you're going to encounter. By the way, if you
experience this situation again, other things may be called for
depending on details of the context," and wanting them to start to see
things more complexly, to be able to think about things more complexly
and to understand who they are in that moment.

[11:26] I think that's where the video recording in particular becomes
important, is that ‑‑ especially for our pre‑service teachers who are
sophomores in college ‑‑ they're truly becoming to see themselves as
teachers for the first time. They are getting to hear what they sound
like when they're talking to students and parents.

[11:43] They're getting to look at what they look like sitting as the
person in authority after having been out of the high school situation
for only a year or two. For a lot of them, it's a moment of transition
to sit around at the other side of the desk, so to speak, and to figure
out who I am in that role.

[12:01] I think some portion of what we do is to say to them, "Follow
your human instincts more and worry a little less about what you think a
teacher, whoever that looks like in your head, would do or say in that
moment." Part of our work is disrupting hegemonic forms of teaching that
have not served students well, particularly students who have been
marginalized in society and continue to be.

**Stacey**:  [12:27] Awesome. I love that. I'm just going to recap. We
talked about the preparation stage, which is where you all, the
instructors and the administrators who are running this project write
scenarios, prep the actors, and make sure everyone knows what they're
getting into.

[12:46] Stage one is the actual encounter that's videotaped. Stage two
is the debriefing with the instructor of that video tape. How does that
work?

**Elizabeth**:  [12:54] Not necessarily so. The next thing that
happens after they leave the room one‑on‑one with the actor is that they
go to another room where the group of people who just finished doing the
scenario sits together in a room.

[13:08] We call it a raw debrief, and this is coming from Ben
Doscher's work up in Syracuse, who did a lot of work and has published a
lot on clinical simulations of a slightly different sort.

[13:19] If we're only running one room at a time, we have them sit
with an iPad and just unload what's going on in their head onto the iPad
on video. If we're running multiple rooms at a time, then we bring them
together in a small room. There's no facilitator present. We do have a
video camera still running.

[13:40] We simply say to them, "What just happened and how are you
feeling about it?" Those are our only questions.

**Stacey**:  [13:47] Those are good questions.

**Elizabeth**:  [13:48] Just talk until you feel like you've talked it
out or someone tells you have to go. That's not something we usually
have them watch back. It's definitely something that informs what the
instructor does when we get back to the large group setting. It gives us
a glimpse of how they're making sense of the interaction right after.

[14:06] We have some questions that help us get a sense of how are
they thinking about the situation before they walked into the room. This
helps us right after they've walked out. The next thing they do is
between that time and when we do the group debrief.

[14:18] We try to make that at least three days, usually as much as a
week. They have to watch their video back by themselves and answer some
new questions. Those questions are starting to probe now.

[14:29] What assumptions did you have that weren't met? Why do you
think they weren't met? How many questions did you ask? What kind of
information did you get? ‑‑ those questions that start them taking a
deeper look.

[14:41] They submit those before the group debrief as well so that we
can look at those prior to that whole group debrief and again get a
sense of now that they've watched that video back, how are they thinking
about this so that when we come in and bring anywhere from 5 to 25
students together to talk about this, and each one of them has had in
one sense the same situation to respond to.

[15:04] Where is everybody? How do I provide some instruction? How do
I start conversation with the group that meets them where they are and
not with where they were prior to going to into the room or right after
they've walked out?

**Stacey**:  [15:19] I'm going to revise my recap. You have the
preparation and then the actual filming of the interaction. You call it
raw debrief right afterwards that catches just those two important
questions.

[15:33] About a week later, more probing questions after they've
processed a little more. Do you normally see a difference between the
raw debrief and the more probing reflective questions, or are they
pretty much still on the same track?

**Elizabeth**:  [15:45] Usually, we start to see teachers dig a little
bit deeper in the questions. It depends. Part of my dissertation work
was looking at, when does a critical moment happen? What makes it
critical? When is the point at which a teacher suddenly starts to see
things very differently than they did before?

[16:04] The first time I did this, the very first scenario I ever ran,
I really expected the teachers to go in and be so taken aback by the
interaction that they had that they would walk out and be like, "Woah, I
have to really rethink this." I was a little flabbergasted that they
weren't and alarmed.

[16:21] On the one hand, I was like, "How are you not pushed by this?"
On the other hand, I was like, "This is my dissertation and what on
earth am I going to say about this?"

**Stacey**:  [16:32] These findings can be written up.

**Elizabeth**:  [16:34] On the other hand, what I realized is people
have different trajectories through this. Some teachers go into the
interaction, they walk out and they say, "That did not go like I thought
it was going to. I felt very uncomfortable. I felt like I wasn't saying
what I was trying to say." There are other teachers who don't get to
that until three months after we do the group debrief.

[16:55] I have evidence of that in this trove of data I now have of
people who said it wasn't actually until the last day and our last
conversation at the end of the semester when somebody said this and
mentioned the simulation that I thought "Oh." This is the challenge of
teaching.

[17:13] We know this happens in K12 schooling. A second grade teacher
will read a book or have a conversation and somewhere around the
beginning of fourth, that student remembers back. It helps them in some
way or serves as a touching stone for new information. We don't get to
see those trajectories unfold.

[17:31] At least within the scope of our teacher ed program, we do get
to see that more often. For undergrads, they have my class sophomore
year. They continue to do simulations in their later coursework, but in
fewer numbers.

[17:44] We're able to sometimes hear them say, "This is just like this
scenario I had," or they'll bring up a character from one of the
scenarios. It's a common reference for everyone in that classroom, and
they all remember Ms. Sahil.

[18:01] They can all talk about Mr. Duncan and how frustrating Mr.
Duncan was, and how this thing that my instructor's teaching me now
would have helped me there. We're able to see this build. We know it's
how in‑service teachers learn to the extent that we have information on
that.

[18:15] We know that they have scenarios and then, often, they're
troubled. They go out looking for how to handle those scenarios better.
In pre‑service teacher education, we don't have those scenarios because
they're not out in schools enough to be witnessing them.

[18:28] Even if they are witnessing them, they're not the ones
necessarily in charge of responding to them.

**Stacey**:  [18:32] They're not insiders in those scenarios even when
they do see them.

**Elizabeth**:  [18:35] This gives them a somewhat authentic, but
still safe place to get a sense of what that looks like. A big part of
my goal was to create a way for teachers to learn these things or to
begin to learn about these things in a way that minimized harm on some
of our most vulnerable students.

[18:56] Very often, programs will say, "Oh, in your first year or two,
you should go tutor in this after school program down the street, or you
should be part of this program that does mentoring."

[19:06] What we're doing is sticking students that are complete
novices to thinking about these issues with children who have already
experienced the inequities of society or who are not having a positive
experience in schooling, and we're asking our teachers to learn on them.

[19:22] While there's still a level of learning on happening here, we
at least have actors who are fully consented, who understand what's
about to happen and who can choose to opt out at any point if they feel
like it's no longer something they want to participate in.

**Stacey**:  [19:35] That's great. I love that. We're not sending our
most vulnerable students, our least prepared teachers right off the bat.

**Elizabeth**:  [19:42] Yeah.

**Stacey**:  [19:44] After talking through all the different stages of
the project, I can see how several of them are really facilitated, made
possible through different technologies that you've used.

[19:55] I'm wondering, how did you come to those technologies and did
you have any challenges when you were setting up the project figuring
out if someone is trying to do a raw debrief alone? How do we record
that? How did you approach deciding which technologies would fit this
project?

**Elizabeth**:  [20:12] Some of choosing the technologies was just
what was practical in the moment, what we had access too. Some of it was
this idea of what do I need to see, especially coming from a critical
discourse analysis perspective. I wanted to see them talk about what
they just experienced, not just listen to it.

[20:30] Doing Photo Booth on iPad gave me more information as an
instructor about how to support that student than the audio alone. I
mean, we bought the iPad specifically for that purpose to begin with.

[20:42] Now, we use them in other ways as well in terms of videoing.
We started initially running these at the simulation lab at the medical
center where they have hidden cameras and hidden audio in a way that
allows them to really forget, to a certain extent, that this is
happening.

[21:00] Unfortunately, over there, it looks like a doctor's office,
which is awkward and it's not affordable to continue doing that. Really
just thinking about what all do we need to capture here. There are
places that are using more advanced technologies in terms of also trying
to track heart rate and blood pressure to get a sense of the stress
level and all that thing.

[21:23] With the video, we're just trying to figure out, because it's
a mostly stationary thing, we can just point a camera and capture what
we need to. We want to make sure we get good audio because we want to
make sure we can hear everybody.

[21:35] This idea of really needing to see what's happening, the way
that this is embodied for the teacher and the way that they are
communicating, they're not just intellectual and emotional but truly
affective state. It is important to me as an instructor and as a
researcher.

**Stacey**:  [21:49] Just another logistical question. How do you get
the video then to the instructor who is that student's instructors?

**Elizabeth**:  [21:56] For the purposes of Vanderbilt, we've been
using Box, since it's a FERPA compliant space. The only person who has
access to it then is the instructor and the student. We, basically,
leave it there long enough for them to watch it and then we pull it down
and it gets stored on a Vanderbilt server, since this is all done under
IRB.

**Stacey**:  [22:12] The students themselves would upload it to...

**Elizabeth**:  [22:14] No. We record it. We upload it, make sure they
can see it, the instructor can see it, and when they've finished what we
call their simulation cycle, then we pull it all down and save it for
data purposes.

**Stacey**:  [22:27] That was excellent. Thank you so much for walking
us through that. I think this is such a cool project. I'm really excited
it's happening in Peabody College and I look forward to keeping up with
you.

[22:37] I know you've been in the news. I look forward to keeping up
with how the project progresses and maybe expands to other places. Our
last question that we ask all of our guests is, what is your favorite
non‑digital, analog educational technology?

**Elizabeth**:  [22:52] Because I'm a teacher, and I feel like I have
to go with a chalkboard here.

[22:55] [laughter]

**Elizabeth**:  [22:56] I think that it serves a function on multiple
levels. One is that, not that long ago, that was also what kids wrote on
in schools. Everybody had their own slate and chalk. It became the space
that kids were practicing.

[23:10] Because it wasn't on paper, it also wasn't permanent and I
think that's one of the things that was beautiful about the use of
chalkboards. That is still interesting and how we're starting to use or
have begun using little white boards with kids. It's the idea that you
don't have to do it and turn it in for it to be marked and is it correct
or incorrect.

[23:29] Rather, this is a practice space. This is a place to learn.
It's transient. What you write down, you can erase and do over. When you
feel like you've got that down, we're going to erase that and move on to
the next thing.

[23:42] It has both that...all of us who grew up wanting to be
teachers loved the idea the chalk and the chalkboard and the histories
of kids having to clean erasers out in the grass next to the classroom.

[23:54] Also just the fact that it was a space that kids could learn
on and not feel like it was some permanent reflection of who they were
as a learner, but really a space to be a learner.

**Stacey**:  [24:04] That's awesome. I really like that answer. Liz,
thank you so much for being here today.

**Elizabeth**:  [24:09] Thank you.

**Stacey**:  [24:10] I know you have to run to your next meeting, but
this was a great interview.

[24:13] [background music]

**Elizabeth**:  [24:13] Thank you.

**Derek**:  [24:14] That was Elizabeth Self, lecturer in Teaching and
Learning at Vanderbilt University. Liz works with pre‑service K12
teachers, helping to prepare them for the classroom.

[24:24] At the Center for Teaching, we work with novice teachers too,
although in our case, that means grad students and junior faculty
teaching at the university level.

[24:31] We've always had practice teaching with feedback as part of
our training programs but we haven't built out the simulation structure
that Liz described in her interview.

[24:39] I can imagine, however, that the simulations she runs would
have a useful place in our work, particularly as we work with
instructors around issues of power and difference in the classroom.

[24:48] If you'd like to learn more about Liz's work, see our show
notes for links to her website and an education week story about her
work. You can find those show notes on our website, leadinglinespod.com.

[24:58] We welcome your comments and questions there and on Twitter,
where our handle is @leadinglinespod.

[25:04] Also, you can find us on iTunes. If you wouldn't mind leaving
us a review or rating there, that would be really helpful. iTunes uses
those to decide which podcasts to share. It will help more people find
our work.

[25:17] Leading Lines is produced by the Center for Teaching, the
Vanderbilt Institute for Digital Learning, the Office of Scholarly
Communications, and the Associate Provost for Digital Learning.

[25:24] This episode was edited by Rhett McDaniel. Look for new
episodes the first and third Monday of each month. I'm your host, Derek
Bruff. Thanks for listening.

[25:34] [music]

