---
layout: post
title:  "Episode 022: Humberto Garcia"
date:   2017-08-07
excerpt: "Humberto Garcia, associate professor of English at UC-Merced, shares how he teaches with blogs."
episode: true
tag:
- course blogs
- clickers
- Students as Producers
comments: true
---

In this episode, we interview Humberto Garcia, associate professor of English at the University of California at Merced. Several years ago while teaching at Vanderbilt, Garcia started experimenting with blogs in his teaching, having students write short blog posts on a common course blog in lieu of the usual reading response papers. Humberto kept experimenting with blogs every semester, trying out creative new ways to use them both outside of class and during class. 

In this interview, Humberto talks about his reasons for teaching with blogs, as well as specific strategies he has used over time to integrate out-of-class and in-class learning through blogs. And he describes his experiments with classroom response systems as a way to incorporate student blogging in larger classes.

Links:

<ul>
<li><a href="http://ssha.ucmerced.edu/content/humberto-garcia">Humberto Garcia's faculty page at UC-Merced</a></li>
<li><a href="https://english102literaturesurvey.wordpress.com/">English Literature of the Long Eighteenth Century course blog</a></li>
<li><a href="https://transnationalencounterswithislam.wordpress.com/">Transnational Encounters with Islam in 18th and 19th Century British Literature course blog</a></li>
<li><a href="https://williamblakeandenlightenmentmedia.wordpress.com/">William Blake and Enlightenment Media course blog</a></li>
<li><a href="https://britishromanticismandindia.wordpress.com/">British Romanticism and India course blog</a></li>
</ul>

<iframe width="100%" height="450" scrolling="no" frameborder="no" src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/336363844%3Fsecret_token%3Ds-19UPi&amp;auto_play=false&amp;hide_related=false&amp;show_comments=true&amp;show_user=true&amp;show_reposts=false&amp;visual=true"></iframe>

## Episode 22: Humberto Garcia

 [00:00] [background music]

**Derek Bruff**:  [00:02] Welcome to season three of "Leading Lines,"
a podcast on educational technology from Vanderbilt University. I'm your
host, Derek Bruff, Director of the Vanderbilt Center for Teaching.

[00:16] In this episode, I interview Humberto Garcia, Associate
Professor of English at the University of California at Merced.

[00:24] I met Humberto several years ago when he was teaching at
Vanderbilt. Back then, he started experimenting with blogs in his
teaching, having students write short blog posts on a common course
blog, in lieu of the usual reading response papers.

[00:36] Humberto kept experimenting with blogs every semester, trying
out new ways to use them both outside of class and during class, too. He
brought so much creativity to his use of course blogs that I started
calling him, "The Blogfather" of the English Department.

[00:48] Humberto moved to UC Merced a couple of years ago. I hadn't
talked with him since then, and I was eager to hear what he was doing
with blogs these days. I was not disappointed. His use of blogs has only
gotten more creative and intentional since he was at Vanderbilt.

[01:02] He started experimenting with classroom response systems, also
known as clickers ‑‑ one of my other favorite educational technologies
‑‑ even combining clickers and blogs in interesting ways. I really enjoyed my conversation with Humberto, and I hope you will, too.

[01:18] [background music]

**Derek**:  [01:18] Humberto, thanks for talking with me this
afternoon. I'm glad to have a chance to catch up a little bit and hear
about your teaching. Can you start by giving us a sense of what kinds of
courses you teach at UC Merced?

**Humberto Garcia**:  [01:34] Sure. Thank you very much for having me
here. It's a real pleasure to do this interview and share my experiences
with blogging.

[01:40] You know, overall, I use them for English courses with an
interdisciplinary component. That is to say, English courses that
intersect with history, the arts, and sociology, and various other
disciplines. A lot of these courses are upper division and lower
division courses.

[02:07] I also teach survey courses that enroll from 50 to 60
students. Again, primarily, in the discipline of English literary
studies, which is my specialty.

**Derek**:  [02:21] You said upper division and lower division, so
some majors, but then also a lot of non‑majors.

**Humberto**:  [02:27] Mostly majors, a lot of non‑majors. The lower
divisions tend to have more non‑majors in them.

**Derek**:  [02:33] I remember years ago when you were at Vanderbilt
in the English Department here, you and I did some work looking at how
you might use blogs in your teaching. I was impressed by how intentional
you were as you started experimenting with blogs.

[02:52] What was your initial interest in experimenting with course
blogs? Why was that a tool that seemed it had some potential utility for
you?

**Humberto**:  [03:04] There's three primary reasons for that. The
first one is I've come to the conclusion...I started with the hypothesis
that really students learn best through informal writing. I've seen it
through in‑class journaling assignments where they actually wrote
journals with pen and paper.

[03:23] What I discovered is that that mode of writing really picked
up even better when you do it online, and you have an actual online
public audience.

[03:31] That is to say, the students are doing informal writing
assignments on a periodic weekly basis. They're primarily writing not
just to me, but to a larger online audience.

[03:41] That changed the dynamics of writing incredibly, and it really
opened up possibilities for them to think carefully about audience and
how that shapes the decisions that they make as writers.

[03:55] It created for a lot of more dynamic learning, and I really am
firmly committed to the idea that actual learning works best at the
level of writing, primarily informal writing.

[04:05] The second reason is connected to that one in that a lot of
this informal writing and thinking really feeds in very well to the
formal research paper, or term paper.

[04:15] There's a strong synergy that develops in the way that
students begin to explore these ideas through informal writing that then
become, in a sense if you will, think of the blog posts as incubators
for good ideas.

[04:32] I should say that these blog posts are about 200, 350‑words.
They write them every week.

[04:38] It has to do with their assignments so there's a strong
continuity of thinking As they go along the way, they develop paper
topics, and they discover original ideas that they could actually work
on and develop further into a term paper, or a research paper project.

[04:55] Then the third reason is the more basic one. It's the one that
drove me finally to adopt the blog format. That is to say, that it
generates much better discussion in class.

[05:07] Students seem so much more engaged with the material once that
they see that their opinions, and their views, and their interpretations
are being valued by the professor and that other students get to see
those ideas, and engage with them, and talk about them in class.

[05:23] It becomes more of a student‑centered approach. Students
appreciated that and took off on that. It just made a better social
environment, a more cohesive one. It created more sense of camaraderie
in the class, among students who felt that they were in charge of their
own learning.

**Derek**:  [05:43] When you say better than or more than, what's your
comparison? Blogs versus...

**Humberto**:  [05:51] Back then, more than it would say without the
blogs. I would just structure discussions around questions of free
writing assignments in class. I would do informal writing with them in
class. I'll have them keep journals as well.

[06:09] What I found was that they were just disengaged with that kind
of a writing. The key reason for that is that they didn't have a public.
With blogs, they have a larger public besides me. They have their peers
and the online community.

[06:28] When I would do this kind of informal writing, they didn't
have a public. They felt that they were just doing busy work to appease
me. [laughs]

**Derek**:  [06:37] They might do the informal writing, but you were
their only audience. It was only ever read by one person.

[06:43] Moving into blogs meant that they now were writing for their
peers more than anyone. That audience somehow, as you say, helped them
have better discussion, better community as a class.

**Humberto**:  [06:58] The fact that they also became aware that they
were writing to a public online, outside the classroom. They were
surprised to see when there were occasions where strangers from
cyberspace would come in and provide comments on their blog posts.

[07:14] I would also share that in class to show that what they were
thinking and what they were writing was making an impact in the world
outside the classroom.

**Derek**:  [07:24] Typically, students might write for their
professor. They might do some peer review in class. This was taking it
to a much wider audience. I want to come back to that in a minute.

[07:34] Can you say a little more concretely what does a blogging
assignment look like? What's, maybe, a typical one? How do you work it
in the class? How you grade it? What do the mechanics of it look like?

**Humberto**:  [07:53] First of all, what I do is I have them do it
every week. Like I said, it's about 200 to 350‑word. It's supposed to be
informal and low‑key.

[08:04] It is supposed to be continuous every week. I set it up by
providing a very broad prompt, a question prompt, of some sort dealing
with the assigned reading for that week.

[08:14] I ask a particular question or a general question. I might ask
a question that forces them to think about their reading in that week
and its connection with contemporary events or issues of some sort or
another.

[08:28] They're broad enough where it gives them an opportunity to
develop their own interpretation, according to their interests and
values. They go ahead, and they write these.

[08:39] I grade them usually on a letter grade basis because it's most
legible to them. They feel more comfortable when they see some A, B, or
C. It gives them a better sense of where they're at. It seemed that that
model of grading has worked the best.

[08:52] I do provide grading rubrics that explains very carefully what
is an A level blog post assignment, what's a B level, what's a C level,
what have you. They understand exactly what the grading criteria are.

[09:08] Primarily, what I stress to them is that the key here is a
sense of originality. That is to say, that they take calculated risks in
providing interpretations that take us in new directions in our
discussion about the material.

[09:23] Or expose it to ideas that might seem strange and unusual but
are still worth pursuing and thinking about in class and sharing with
the online public.

[09:33] That's really the primary criteria I have for blog post
writing. Again, the goal here is informality that this is not supposed
to be a mini term paper, although some students tend to skew in that
direction sometimes, which is fine, too. It feeds into the term paper
writing.

[09:51] For the most part, this is supposed to be informal
assignments, pretty much in a one solid paragraph, two solid paragraphs.
Students get carried away very easily with these assignments.

[10:03] For the most part, I see them write more than less. A lot of
them tend to go way over the 350‑word limit. It's a way for them to
flesh out ideas. It usually has worked very well in that respect.

**Derek**:  [10:16] What do you do with the blog posts after they're
written? Do you weave them into the class conversation? Can you give me
a sense of how that works?

**Humberto**:  [10:27] There's a number of ways in which I integrate
them into the classroom. I also just make it a very general claim here
and just put this out there. It's absolutely essential that you
integrate what's going on outside the class with blogging with what's
going inside the class.

[10:44] That is an absolute essential step if you're going to use blog
posts successfully. Otherwise, it becomes busy work.

[10:51] There's where you have to try hard as an instructor to find
ways in which to connect what they're doing online outside the class to
what they're doing inside. I have a number of ways of doing that.

[11:07] I may start off a class discussion where I pick a particular
student post. I say, "Well, here's a very interesting idea worth
discussing, and it raises interesting questions," or the student may
have raised an interesting question in that blog post.

[11:20] That's a good way to kick‑start discussion. I may have them in
the first 5 or 10 minutes of class free‑write, do a free writing in
class with pen and paper, pretty much reflecting on what they wrote for
that day for their blog post.

[11:36] Usually, the way I have it set up is that the blog posts are
due an hour before class time. That way, when they come into class, they
already have something to share and something to write about. I have
them do it that way as well.

[11:48] Then for a class that I feel more confident about, where
there's a good sense of camaraderie and students feel comfortable with
each other, I actually will have them work in groups into a workshop
where they grade each other's blog posts. I may pick a representation.

[12:05] Let's say, I'll select about three student blog posts as an
example from students who I feel are pretty much comfortable in sharing
their work. They will evaluate, comment, and grade in groups. Then share
the results and why they graded the way they do.

[12:22] That works really well early on in the semester so they could
understand and integrate the blog post grading criteria and how to write
an effective blog post. That has worked really well.

[12:33] Again, you have to make sure you have a class of students that
feel comfortable with that. Otherwise, you could always try picking blog
posts from your previous semester from other students.

[12:42] That also helps ease anxieties. I've tried a lot of that as
well. This is just some of the ways that I've tried to integrate a blog
posting class. There's a wide array of examples. I'll just stop there
for the sake of time.

**Derek**:  [12:59] Do you also sometimes call a student by name and
ask them to share in the discussion something they had written about
because you know they've got that in their head?

**Humberto**:  [13:13] It depends on the particular class, the student
dynamics that are developing in there. Like I said, where classes
develop a good social cohesion and rapport, I tend to call on them. They
feel comfortable about that.

[13:27] They actually feel very excited when their professor actually
picks their blog post and talks about it and is willing to discuss their
ideas, and treat it respectfully, and value it. They really like that.
They feel a sense of respect.

[13:40] They love that, but there are other classes where students may
be more shy, more timid, or may not be comfortable sharing their ideas
in public. I try to respect those students as well.

[13:55] It's not always the case that I call out students by name. The
ones that I do are ones that I know pretty well. I already know that
they are comfortable with that.

[14:04] I know that last semester, teaching with blogs among a class
of 50 to 60 students, where the anxiety levels for participating
publicly were pretty high, I would certainly not call on any student.

[14:18] What I did in that scenario is that I actually provided a list
where I told students to write their names, if they feel comfortable
sharing their ideas on the blog post.

[14:29] If they don't feel comfortable doing so, do not write their
name on that sheet. I've had about 20, 25 students that felt
comfortable, but there were the majority of the other students who felt
uncomfortable.

[14:40] There are various ways of gauging that. You have to sort of
finesse that. It is contingent on the kind of social environment that
you have. The enrollment level plays a major role. I would say that blog
posts work most successfully when you have a class of, let's say, 10 to
15 students.

[15:02] That's the ideal environment for me because it creates a kind
of intimacy that is conducive to good learning. Once you start getting
into larger enrollments, it becomes more difficult and tricky how to
integrate their voices from the blog posts.

**Derek**:  [15:20] It sounds like you've done it with 50 or 60
students. You still find a way to use them productively?

**Humberto**:  [15:24] Yes. I told you, by creating a list where
students, who felt comfortable sharing their work, would write their
name. Then I would call upon them, it worked at that level.

[15:38] Students, who felt less comfortable, over time actually began
to open up and participate once they saw that their peers were doing it
and that there was no major social risk. A certain comfortable level set
in.

[15:50] Then those who were not willing to sign up at first, actually
began signing up later on in the semester. There was that level of
participation.

[16:01] I should also mention here, and interject, and say that there
are new ways that I've started using the blog posts that have helped
with large enrollment courses. That's through the integration of blog
post writing and clicker technology.

[16:16] I would use clicking technology to set up questions where I
would get students to read, let's say, three representative examples of
student blog posts. Then have them vote through a question which one
they thought was the most effective interpretation of the literary text,
which one of their peers offered the best, most concise interpretation.

[16:38] Even those students who felt uncomfortable using the blog post
medium were able, however, to indirectly participate by using clicker
technology and providing some input indirectly into their peers' work.

[16:53] There were ways that I was able to reach those students who
were either too shy or uncomfortable with the blog post exercises or
were, perhaps, a little bit too jaded about using this kind of blog post
period.

[17:07] Nonetheless, were able to participate, at least, anonymously
and indirectly through clicker technology. That worked very
successfully, I should say.

**Derek**:  [17:17] Well, I think you know me well enough to know I
found that very exciting. [laughs] I liked that example a lot, having
students look at each other's work and then using some type of classroom
response system, polling system to have them perform an analysis or an
evaluation and, like you said, decide which one was the best answer to
the question.

[17:38] I can imagine you could give them lots of different criteria
to apply to a set of blog posts and pick the best post that matches
that. I love the idea of using a clicker system to have students look at
their own work.

[17:56] That kind of classic classroom response system is the
instructor creates the question and the answer choices ‑‑ A, B, C, D.

[18:05] In this case, you're having the students look at their own
work in this structured in‑class activity that I would imagine works
great, whether you have 20 students or 100 students. You could structure
it well with the classroom response system.

**Humberto**:  [18:19] That's right. That's one of the major
discoveries that I made using clicker technology actually, that I would
use the clicker technology in a way to structure a lot of the ideas that
were coming through through the blog posts.

[18:34] For example, I would get 50 students blogging. It's impossible
for you to actually engage with 50 students directly in class. I mean,
it's impossible.

[18:45] A lot of key themes and ideas would emerge from a lot of these
blog posts. I would use that as a way to structure and develop clicker
questions.

[18:55] That way, I was still engaging with their blog posts in a very
mediated form, through clicker technology. Students registered that.
They saw that.

[19:04] Their work was being, in a sense, indirectly evaluated and
responded to from their instructor. Then they were forced to further
think about and prompted to discuss these ideas that were generated
through them, not me.

[19:20] That ended up also a very helpful exercise for structuring
discussion, particularly, in large enrollment courses.

**Derek**:  [19:31] One of the challenges that instructors have when
they're writing clicker questions is to write a really good question,
particularly a multiple choice question.

[19:39] You need to get inside your student's head and try to have a
sense about how they're thinking about a particular question or topic,
the different perspectives, or backgrounds, or experiences, or ideas
that students have.

[19:50] Writing the answer choices requires a little bit of that
imagining what it's like to be a student and come to this question. What
I'm hearing from you is you don't really have to imagine so much.

[20:02] You just have to read their blog posts before class and then
structure some of your questions around that. That would mean that you
write those clicker questions fairly soon before class, right? It's not
something that you do a week in advance.

**Humberto**:  [20:18] I would do it an hour, two hours before. Of
course, I have a lot of students that start blogging earlier on. Some of
them might start blogging the day before, so I already can anticipate
some of the major themes and ideas that are developing.

[20:32] I should also say that when you start using blog posts
periodically, you become a better mind reader as an instructor. You can
anticipate a lot of the ideas and a lot of the things that students are
going to say and how they're going to interpret.

[20:47] Like I said, this is a point I made earlier, that it really
helps with instructor preparation because you don't have to just guess
what your students are going to do.

[20:57] You have a pretty good proximate of what students are going to
be thinking once you start using blog posts periodically. That helps as
well.

[21:08] When it comes down to actually writing the clicker question, I
really do it that hour before. I already have some possibilities of what
that question might look like hours before, if not even a day in
advance.

**Derek**:  [21:20] That makes sense that you would read some of the
early blog posts. You know your material. You're not starting from
scratch.

**Humberto**:  [21:29] That's right.

**Derek**:  [21:29] Making those connections. I like that idea a lot.
A few other questions about blogging.

[21:36] One of the things that I actually got to see you do once when
you were at Vanderbilt was have students write blog posts or rather
comment on blog posts during class. Is that still something that you do,
maybe, in some of your smaller classes?

**Humberto**:  [21:51] Yes. That's another very effective way of
integrating out‑of‑class blogging with what's going on in class.

[22:01] I have them do that periodically, both in my smaller classes
and also my larger enrollment classes, where they go ahead and they
provide comments on their favorite blog post.

[22:14] I provide a very key question, "What is the most original idea
presented in this blog post, and how can it be enhanced or improved?"
That's always my guiding question.

[22:23] Students already know what they're going to be responding to.
I ask them to provide three to four sentences or five sentences, at the
max, that would answer that particular question and why they picked that
particular blog post as their favorite.

[22:41] I've set it up in that way. It's always been very productive.
It gets them to engage with their peers and see what their peers are
actually writing, especially for those students who, let's say, may not
be keeping up with what their peers are doing online.

[22:55] There's always those students that lag behind on the blog
posts and don't see what their peers are doing. It's a great way for
them to see that there's actual learning going on online and also to get
them really engaged with what their peers are saying.

[23:11] It is, again, a great way of kick‑starting discussion in class
because right after that 15 or 20‑minute exercise of doing in‑class
blogging, then they start discussing their ideas.

[23:23] By that point, the instructor doesn't have to facilitate that
much because all the main ideas, and the questions, and the
interpretations are on the table. Students can see what the learning
goals and the intellectual agenda for that day will be. They go ahead,
and they jump for it.

[23:43] Again, it also ends up producing the sense of camaraderie and
good student reporting, community building.

[23:49] That's another very key function of effective blog use that
both integrates what you're doing out of class, in class. In‑class
blogging is something that I do very often. I find it very effective.

**Derek**:  [24:02] Let me ask this. You mentioned your blogs are
sometimes open to the world, but I recall that some of your blogs were
not. Is that still a choice point for you as to when to make the blog
just for the students and when to open it up for the entire Web to view?

**Humberto**:  [24:20] At this point, I keep all of my blogs public
because I've learned over time that having a real public out there that
students engage with is very essential to their learning, particularly
learning through informal writing.

[24:33] That's a key component to the whole blog exercise. I don't
make any course blog private anymore. There was only one class where I
chose...Well, I should say two classes where I chose to make it private.

[24:48] One was when I was back in Vanderbilt teaching an honors
seminar. The topics were so specialized, and theoretical, and so geared
toward a very specific audience that has that theoretical expertise,
almost like a graduate course, almost like a graduate seminar.

[25:08] I felt that writing for the public there won't really be as
helpful because it would involve for them to have to translate very
complex theoretical paradigms in more layman terms.

[25:21] At that point, I felt like that was not really helpful for
them to deal with their own learning through these theories, which is a
more specialized and technical language.

[25:32] I would say the same for graduate seminars. I feel like making
graduate seminars and blogging through graduate seminars in public would
not be helpful. Especially, it would generate so much anxiety on the
part of grad students.

[25:46] I know so well as honor students who, in many ways, are very
anxious about what they're thinking and how other people might perceive
what they're saying. Those are the cases where I would choose to leave
it private.

[25:59] The other instance where I've left it private was in a course
where we were dealing with a sensitive political issue, dealing with
issues of Islam and Islamophobia, where a lot of students initially, at
first, expressed a lot of concern given the political climate.

[26:15] That talking about Islam in certain ways might generate
political backlash online and how to deal with the harsh issues of
Islamophobia, especially to a larger American public.

[26:30] There was so much anxiety about that and about the way that
their blog posts might be perceived online and how their friends or
family members might be reading them, that I've chose to make it
private.

[26:41] However, by the end of that semester, once they had written so
brilliantly online about the topic of how Islam is represented in
British literature in the 18th and 19th century, and they reflected back
on their writing, by the last day of class, students unanimously voted
to make the private site public.

[27:01] They wanted me to then make it public at the end of the
semester. It's very interesting that they, in a sense, unanimously got
together and said, "What we've actually produced in this class is
actually something that the larger online public should hear, regardless
of the social stakes and risks."

[27:20] At that point, after they've written and they saw what they've
done, they felt more comfortable sharing with the online public. I made
it public at that point.

[27:27] I think from that point onward, I've chosen pretty much almost
all my classes, except the highly specialized courses, let's say, like
an honors. With that exception, all my other courses are really public.

**Derek**:  [27:41] Wow, that's a really great story, Humberto. I had
remembered that course and how you had made the decision to make it
private. I hadn't heard part two of that story, the decision the
students made at the end of the semester. That's pretty amazing.

[27:58] Can you say more? I know you mentioned having students engage
in these creative projects, not just the informal writing that they do
in the blog.

[28:08] I gathered that you also have your students do more
significant creative projects now in some of your courses. Can you say
more about why you do that and what that looks like for your students?

**Humberto**:  [28:19] Sure. That's a new level of experimentation
that I'm currently working on and, since past semester, I've been trying
to implement in the courses.

[28:29] That is to say, that students, especially here where I am at
the University of California Merced, are very keen on creative modes of
expression and aesthetics. The blog post is an excellent platform for
that.

[28:44] What I have them do is, at the end of the semester for this
course I was teaching...I was teaching an upper division English
literature course on the 18th century.

[28:52] At the end of the semester, I have them do a creative writing
project where students pick one particular literary text that they've
studied, and they parody or imitate it for a contemporary audience.

[29:06] They have to reinvent the form and experiment with various
mediums to recreate that literary work and show how that literary work
still has the power, or the aesthetic power, and the intellectual power,
if you will, to communicate to an actual audience today.

[29:26] The blog post lend itself really well to that because I saw a
lot of amazing examples of students who were just completely inspired by
this assignment and by the blog post, in terms of what it allowed them
to do.

[29:40] I've had students create music videos of poems, rap songs,
visual expressions, series of paintings or slides, just various forms of
creativity that involved both the visual and the audio that were
integrated on the blog posts in ways that surprised me and that I never
even anticipated.

[30:06] It's because of what the blog post and particularly the
creative use of blog post does, it taps into analytic skills from
students that usually don't feel like they could adequately express
those skills through the traditional genre, or the term paper, or the
research paper, which for a lot of students is an archaic form for them
to engage with.

[30:31] It inhibits their creative and intellectual ability to engage
with the material they're learning. Once I use the creative writing as a
different type of genre, a genre in a sense that they could create of
their own, they create their own conventions for that genre.

[30:48] That taps in into a different analytic skill set that they
could then use to explore the material in fresh ways and one that
directly integrates with their personal lives and with their
contemporary moment and actually facilitates that sense of deep learning
that we talk about that is so essential to what is it that happens in
our classrooms.

[31:10] That deep learning experience that ties into the material
they're learning to their lives and to the values that they hold.

[31:17] It's really the creative writing component where I've seen,
especially being at this institution, at a public institution over here
in California, where a lot of students here are first‑generation
students who are entering college for the first time.

[31:33] Don't have any idea what the genre of the term paper and the
research paper mean. Then they feel there's an open invitation for them
to engage with the mediums that they feel comfortable with ‑‑ music
videos, email, Instagram.

[31:48] Have a student recreate a poem from the 18th century in a mode
of Instagram, for instance. Engage in various types of mediums that they
feel comfortable with, and it's part of their media ecology to then
engage in this deep learning.

[32:05] For that reason, I've begun to switch more toward
non‑traditional modes of writing, particularly this creative project
that I have them do at the end of the semester. I think it's going to
become more standard as I move forward teaching with blog posts.

**Derek**:  [32:24] Humberto, I'm going to end with a question we ask
all of our guests. [laughs] You talk a lot about digital educational
psychology on this podcast. What is your favorite analog educational
technology?

**Humberto**:  [32:40] Well, that would have to be the good
old‑fashioned overhead projector. That would be what I would consider
the old analog model. It's certainly the model that I learned when I was
in college.

[32:56] They used transparencies, and put them in the overhead
projector, and get them to show up in a screen.

[33:03] I know that some of these might seem clunky and such, but they
still have a value to them. Despite all our talk about the
sophistications that are available through blog post writing or engaging
with clicker technology or such, there's still much value in the
old‑fashioned technology, like the overhead projector.

[33:25] Here's a key feature, and something to keep in mind as well,
and why you want to still continue using those in the classroom in
combination with blog post writing and other forms of more sophisticated
technology. That is to say, that it provides you a sense of manual
dexterity.

[33:43] What I mean by manual dexterity is that, with these
old‑fashioned technologies, you could just pick it up with your hands.
You could write on them at the moment.

[33:52] If we're analyzing a poem and I have it on an overhead
projector, I can actually just go right in and just write notes, circle
words, tease out meanings.

[34:04] Model for students at that moment, in how to engage with the
literary text and doing a close analysis of it. I can't really do that
so well and so successfully through blog posts actually.

[34:16] It doesn't give me that manual dexterity. I still have my
favorites, in terms of the overhead projector, which I think helps me do
that and sometimes in much better ways than these more sophisticated,
newer modes of technology.

**Derek**:  [34:31] That's great, and I know what you're saying. I've
seen faculty use overhead projectors, and transparencies, and document
cameras as well to really put a text in front of everyone, mark it up,
and talk about it in really intentional ways.

[34:48] Thank you for talking with us, Humberto. This has been really
fascinating.

[34:53] I've long been impressed by how intentional you are about the
ways you use technology, and building it, and change their use over
time.

[35:02] I really had fun hearing about some of the creative uses that
you found for blogs and other technologies today.

[35:08] Thanks for this, Humberto. This has been great.

**Humberto**:  [35:10] Well, I thank you for having me. This has been
a real pleasure to share my teaching with blogs. Thank you so much.

[35:17] [background music]

**Derek**:  [35:17] Thanks. That was Humberto Garcia, Associate
Professor of English at the University of California at Merced.

[35:26] N the show notes, you'll find links to information about
Humberto as well as a couple of his course blogs. You'll find those show
notes on our website, leadinglinespod.com. We welcome your comments and
questions there and on Twitter where our handle is @leadinglinespod.

[35:39] You can subscribe to our podcast through iTunes or your other
favorite podcast app. If you like what you hear on the podcast, please
leave us a rating and a review on iTunes. That helps other listeners
find the show.

[35:50] Leading Lines is produced by the Center for Teaching, the
Vanderbilt Institute for Digital Learning, the Office of Scholarly
Communications, and the Associate Provost for Digital Learning.

[35:57] This episode was edited by Rhett McDaniel. Look for new
episodes the first and third Monday of each month. We've got several
great interviews already lined up and recorded for Season Three.

[36:06] [background music]

**Derek**:  [36:07] I'm your host, Derek Bruff. Thanks for listening.

