---
layout: post
title:  "Episode 026: Maha Bali"
date:   2017-10-02
excerpt: "Maha Bali, associate professor of the practice at the Center for Learning and Teaching at the American University in Cairo, discusses digital literacy and critical pedagogy."
episode: true
tag:
- digital literacy
- critical pedagogy
- social media
comments: true
---

In this episode, the newest member of the Leading Lines team, Melissa Mallon, interviews Maha Bali, associate professor of the practice at the Center for Learning and Teaching at the American University in Cairo. Maha is a full-time faculty developer and also teaches educational game design to undergraduates. She’s also very active in educational technology and digital pedagogy discussions online. She and Melissa have a wide-ranging conversation, from faculty development, to critical pedagogy, to digital literacy, to surveillance capitalism, to social media, and more.  

Links

<ul>

<li><a href="http://www.aucegypt.edu/fac/mahabali">Maha Bali’s faculty page</a></li>
<li><a href="https://twitter.com/Bali_Maha">@Bali_Maha</a> on Twitter</li>
<li><a href="https://blog.mahabali.me/">Reflecting Allowed</a>, Maha Bali’s blog</li>
<li><a href="http://www.chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/author/mbali">Maha Bali’s ProfHacker posts</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.digitalpedagogylab.com/hybridped/">Hybrid Pedagogy</a></li>
<li><a href="http://virtuallyconnecting.org/">Virtually Connecting</a></li>
</ul>

<iframe width="100%" height="300" scrolling="no" frameborder="no" src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/344470740%3Fsecret_token%3Ds-3WRU0&amp;color=%23ff5500&amp;auto_play=false&amp;hide_related=false&amp;show_comments=true&amp;show_user=true&amp;show_reposts=false&amp;visual=true"></iframe>

Episode 26: Maha Bali

 [00:00] [music]

**Derek Bruff**:  [00:02] Welcome to "Leading Lines," a podcast from
Vanderbilt University. I'm your host, Derek Bruff, Director of the
Vanderbilt Center for Teaching. In this podcast, we explore creative,
intentional, and effective uses of technology to enhance student
learning. Uses that point the way to the future of educational
technology in college and university settings.

[00:23] In this episode, the newest member of the Leading Lines team,
Melissa Mallon, interviews Maha Bali, Associate Professor of the
Practice at the Center for Learning and Teaching at the American
University in Cairo, Egypt.

[00:34] Maha is a full‑time faculty developer, like me, and also
teaches educational game design to undergraduates. She's also incredibly
active in educational technology, and digital pedagogy discussions
online. Seriously, I see her name everywhere.

[00:47] I'm thrilled to have her on the podcast from halfway around
the world in Cairo. She and Melissa have a wide ranging conversation
from faculty development to critical pedagogy to digital literacy to
surveillance, social media, and more.

[00:58] One note, Maha uses the acronym MOOC at one point in the
interview. MOOC stands for Massive Open Online Course. Maha has been
very active in MOOCs, especially those focused on educational
technology.

[01:09] [music]

**Melissa Mallon**:  [01:09] Thank you so much for joining us, Maha.

**Maha Bali**:  [01:13] Thank you, Melissa. I'm really excited about
this conversation. I'm looking forward to it.

**Melissa**:  [01:21] Wonderful. I thought that we could start off, as
I mentioned to you earlier, the Leading Lines podcast focuses on
educational technologies in relation to teaching and learning in higher
education. I wonder if you wouldn't mind starting by just talking a
little bit about your experience in this realm.

**Maha**:  [01:41] Just generally my experience with educational
technology, I'm originally a computer scientist who hated computers and
left the field, only to come back again at tech.

[01:50] One of the reasons I left the field is that I was frustrated
with computers and more interested in human beings. When I left the
field, after working in corporate for a couple of years in IT, I did a
Masters of Education in e‑learning.

[02:04] One of the cool things about that is that it seemed like it
was combining education and computer science. I was interested in moving
to education. It seemed to be combining them, but the master's I did was
at the University of Sheffield in UK, and it had a very strong human
pedagogy emphasis.

[02:21] For some time after that, I did my PhD in education. It had
nothing to do with technology at all. It was about critical thinking. I
started to think critically about educational technology, and to get
frustrated with techno‑positivist discourses.

[02:37] Towards the end of my PhD, I discovered two things. I
discovered the journal Hybrid Pedagogy, which takes a critical pedagogy
approach to EdTech which was like, wow, because at the time I had not
seen that much before.

[02:49] I also took a MOOC called, "E‑Learning and Digital Cultures
MOOC." Which, again, talked about those extremely positive and extremely
negative use of technology, and how neither of those was representing
reality.

[03:02] In my work, one of the things I've been doing since 2003 as a
faculty developer, with different titles like Instructional Technologist
and all kinds of different titles, was to support faculty to integrate
technology in their teaching. [laughs] That entailed me being positive
about it in the way I dealt with them, but I became increasingly
uncomfortable with that.

[03:28] At the same time, I'm also uncomfortable with faculty who
dismiss technology in the Sherry Turkle type of discourse, that cell
phones are bad, technology is bad. That's also not true, and that's not
the way our students live their lives. I'm always trying to navigate
somewhere in between that is contextualized by the particular...

[03:54] Not generalizing about technology in any way, but looking at
each individual way the technology is used, with which students, at
which point in history. You know what I mean?

**Melissa**:  [04:04] That is one thing that I'm interested in hearing
a little bit more from you. How you balance this role of being a little
bit critical of EdTech in the classroom, but then also trying to
encourage faculty and instructors to incorporate educational
technologies. How does your own experience and background in critical
pedagogy influence how you approach this?

**Maha**:  [04:36] One of the things I'm remembering right now is that
when I first got into this, part of my role was to help encourage people
to use things like learning management systems, like WebCT, and things
like turnitin.com for plagiarism detection. Also to teach them to use
things like learning outcomes and rubrics.

[04:56] At that point in time, very early before I got into the
critical pedagogy aspect, when people resisted that, we used to take it
as their being lazy, or their being backward, and so on. Which I think
now in hindsight was a horrible attitude. One is, because a lot of times
people are resistant for a reason, and whether that reason seems
justified to me or not is not the point.

[05:17] The point is to understand their point of view about why they
don't want to use it or why they want to use. To also keep in mind that
if they're using something they're not comfortable with, the students
are not going to have a good experience. The idea shouldn't be about
encouraging faculty to use WebTV as a goal as much as it should be about
a good learning experience for students.

[05:35] For that faculty member, for that course, using technology is
not going to do that, then it's not something we should be doing. Also,
turn it in as not something that now I would defend. Learning management
systems are not things that I would defend.

[05:50] What I would do now is I'm much more about trying to
understand the faculty member in their philosophy, why they're doing
what they're doing, and occasionally stopping them from doing something
they didn't think through very well before doing it.

[06:04] You don't want them to force students to do something that
would compromise something for the students. Trying to make them think
about, for example, if you're going to ask them to use something like
Facebook, did you keep in mind that some students aren't on Facebook, or
that some students have privacy concerns around Facebook?

[06:19] At the same time, for faculty where Facebook might be useful,
to make them understand that they could create groups where their
students don't have to be their friends to be part of the group. Things
like, that you can create a separate account for your professional
Facebook that's separate from your social Facebook.

[06:35] Trying to navigate all of those complexities, depending on the
context for each individual instructor in class, makes a big difference,
and also listening to students and how they feel about certain things.

[06:48] Listen to your own students, obviously, like in my own classes
when I teach, but also there was one time when I was giving a workshop
about using social media in the classroom.

[06:58] By coincidence, there were three students who were attending
that workshop, it was a workshop for faculty. There were three students
attending it because they were doing a podcast for a journalism course.

[07:08] They were doing it as part of an assignment of theirs.
Suddenly, early in the workshop, I'm like, "Hey, wait a minute, we have
three students here," and we're asking questions in the workshop about
what would students feel, and we have three students right here.

[07:20] They became part of the workshop, and started to give us
feedback. We were thinking, "Oh, should we use the same social media the
students are on, or should we not go into their space?"

[07:30] They responded about them. They told us which social media
they're on, which ones they're comfortable having faculty on, and which
ones they're not. Those are conversations that you should have with each
one of your classes.

[07:41] I do. I did used to go into a class thinking, "This is what
I'm going do with this class." Now, I'm more about, "This is what I'm
going to negotiate with my class." These are the different options.
Then, we're going to choose something that works for everybody, or find
ways for different people to do different things but still achieve
around the same kind of learning. There's that.

**Melissa**:  [08:04] I like that you talk about it as a negotiation
with students, because there's often a lot of the pushback against using
educational technology, social media, whatever it is in the classroom,
often will feel like an all or nothing type situation.

[08:24] It's nice that you're an advocate for the student in this
process, and that it doesn't have to be one specific way to deal with
this. That leads me into another thing that I was curious about.

[08:39] I know that you've said that you may have some challenges for
some of the questions that I asked you, which I think is a good thing.
I'm interested in hearing how you unpack some of this.

[08:54] Thinking about the student experience in higher education,
you've done a lot of work with digital literacy and digital citizenship.
That's something that I'm really interested in as well.

[09:07] I'm wondering if you could talk a little bit about your
thoughts if you see a role or don't see a role for educational
technology in building students' digital literacy skills.

**Maha**:  [09:22] I'm at a moment in my institution where I've been
talking about digital literacy for a while. It's something that should
be a goal for the institution. We have certain learning goals related to
writing and speaking, communication skills.

[09:36] We're a liberal arts institution. We have these overarching
goals that we mix through our liberal arts curriculum, as well as
courses. Things like critical thinking, obviously, citizenship, and
intercultural communication. I think digital literacy should be
somewhere there. At least, in the sense that a lot of communication is
digital now anyway.

[10:00] The way you trim the question in the email about educational
technology playing a role, is that I've been thinking that the thing
isn't about education technology playing a role in developing digital
literacy as much as developing the digital literacy is something that
happens in the classroom, in the way the instructor discusses things
with the students.

[10:21] It's not the technology itself that's going to build digital
literacy, it's going to build your digital skills if you use it. You
have to use it to build the literacies, but, for me, digital literacy is
the judgment aspect, is the critical judgment that you exercise when you
use, or choose not to use the technology.

[10:39] To me, that's not a thing that the technology does in and of
itself. It's something that happens in human communication, around
reflecting about. It's a meta thing. For example, I'm not going to get
my students to use Twitter, and then they're developing their digital
literacy because they're using Twitter, as much as our discussions of
what Twitter is allowing them to do.

[11:06] What happens when you use a hashtag and when you don't, what
happens when you get into a conversation that you weren't originally
tagged on, and those kinds of things. Occasionally, a person could
reflect on them on their own, but they're usually better reflected on,
in a social context.

[11:20] One of the things I'd like to try and I haven't done it
before, but I got this idea from Jade Davis. A few other people are
doing it as well, which is, before we use a technology with students, to
read the terms and conditions together.

[11:35] I haven't done it yet, and some terms and conditions are
horrendous to read, but some of them aren't. [laughs] We'll start with
ones that aren't horrendous to read. Discussing them, and just getting
into that habit of, "By the way, there might be something in those terms
and conditions that you don't agree with."

[11:50] Then, "What are you going to do about it? Is it going to be
worth taking the risk and going ahead anyway? Is it a high risk, for you
personally?"

[11:59] One of the other things is that digital literacy is very
contextual in the sense that, when people talk about things like
surveillance that exists on social media, and they talk about corporate
surveillance, surveillance capitalism and I live in Egypt. [laughs]

[12:15] The society, like surveillance, is a fact of life that isn't
even something that people are ashamed of. That's almost like, "Yeah,
whatever, that's going to happen anyway." We know that maybe they're
doing nothing wrong, and something will be misunderstood because some
algorithm caught you.

[12:35] It's not a light thing, but it's not a shocking thing when it
happens. [laughs] You know what I mean?

**Melissa**:  [12:41] Absolutely.

**Maha**:  [12:42] At the same time, it's very risky to have your
students do something like political blogging. If I was teaching a
course where this could be a risk for them, I wouldn't have them blog
publicly, for example. I wouldn't want that to cause problems for them.
It's too big of a risk. They could get arrested and things like that, so
I wouldn't ever do it.

[13:04] This is what I always say in workshops. "What are you
teaching? What are you going to ask your students to do?" Then, "Is this
something they would benefit from doing publicly, or is it something
that they could harm themselves by doing publicly?"

[13:15] In other contexts, if they're going to be journalists
eventually, it would be stupid not to teach them about writing publicly.
It is part of the learning outcomes for that discipline.

[13:30] What I do believe, and a lot of people in my community and
network online believe, and increasingly people in my office as well
locally, is that things like learning management systems and those kinds
of institutional platforms, do not help build digital literacy because
the world is not that.

[13:51] Of course, when you work in a corporate environment, you might
be using some kind of software that's imposed by the organization, but
those things are just routine. You learn how to make it work and that's
it. It's not a [laughs] transferable digital literacy, and it's more
of a compliance. Digital literacy which I don't think is digital
literacy.

[14:18] There is a space where we could say that the open Web exists.
Students are on social media, they are on the open Web. Therefore, using
those things in an educational way, with a critical conversation in the
classroom, could help develop digital literacy skills versus just using
the LMS in a blind way and just complying to, "This is where your port
materials going to be and just use it that way."

[14:46] My point in challenging that question is just that the
building of digital literacy is something that happens. That's about the
human conversation that happens around it, and not the technology
itself.

**Melissa**:  [14:58] That's fantastic and it goes back to this idea
that it's more than just the technology. That's one thing that I've been
very grateful to read in your work is that you focus on, even something,
like you were mentioning talking about the terms and conditions for the
different tools that are being used.

[15:25] It's a bigger issue than just learning how to use technology,
or engaging in Twitter conversations. It's how you're doing it, and why
you're doing it, and what the purpose is there that seems to be a real
focus of, especially, how you train faculty to incorporate these things.
Would you say that's fair?

**Maha**:  [15:50] Yeah. That's a good point that you brought up. The
thing is not everybody is teaching a course where they feel they have
time to take out of the course, to have those discussions. Sometimes,
you just want to get on with it.

[16:03] Some people aren't equipped to have those conversations.
Hopefully, we can support them by either going in, or having that
conversation with them. Occasionally, we'll go into the class and have
that discussion with the students. Of course, how deep you can go
differs from one to the other, and how much the students absorb from
what you tell them also differs.

[16:23] When I had my students blog before, I would always have a
conversation about Creative Commons and copyright and that kind of
thing. They would still go and both put pictures without references and
pictures that are copyrighted onto their public blogs. No matter how
often you say it, because the culture doesn't support it, it's not like
telling them one time is going to fix it.

[16:45] It's going to take a while for them to internalize.

**Melissa**:  [16:48] Believe me, I feel like this is a constant
library conundrum is that you know there are these things that students
can benefit from so greatly.

[17:01] Even something as small as using Creative Commons, images, or
media, or whatever in their presentations, it can be hard to get them to
see beyond the immediate need of, "Here's what I need to find to
accomplish my projects, and I'm not going to think beyond that."

[17:22] That critical thinking piece is definitely...

**Maha**:  [17:24] You know what was interesting though? There was
this one time where the students all plagiarized in some form or
another, or committed a copyright violation on some form or the other. I
went to the next class, and I completely changed what I was going to do.
It's an education game design class.

[17:39] I made a game about, "How would you feel if?" The game was,
how would you feel if you took a picture, you posted it on Facebook, and
some other person used it in an article they were writing? I thought
that would annoy people, right? If you didn't make your picture Creative
Commons and you put it up.

[17:57] Would you be OK with someone using it and not mentioning you,
that it was yours or anything? Surprisingly, a lot of them actually
didn't care.

[18:06] [laughter]

**Maha**:  [18:06] These kinds of things surprise you. You think it's
so obvious like, "Of course, they're going to get pissed off." Nope, a
lot of them weren't. We had a discussion about that because they're
like, "I don't mind. I put it on Facebook. That means anybody can use
it."

[18:20] I don't know if you've had this conversation with students
before, but I've heard a lot of people in different countries saying
that students assume, if it's public on the Web, that it's not
copyrighted unless you tell them otherwise.

[18:31] Sometimes, when you teach them about Creative Commons, they
think Creative Commons is restricting what you would be able to do
because the default is CC0. If you put it on the Web, I can do whatever
I want with it.

**Melissa**:  [18:43] That's really interesting to me. I like that
this example you have illustrates that, maybe as educators, we think ‑‑
using the example of someone else's copyrighted images ‑‑ that it's one
thing to plagiarize that or to reuse something without permission.

[19:09] Then, we have this assumption that if it was us or the student
work, that they wouldn't want someone to do that same thing to them, but
we're such a different generation in terms of producing content. They
want people to take it.

**Maha**:  [19:29] Yeah. They were like, "I would be honored."

[19:31] [laughter]

**Melissa**:  [19:33] How do you see the education around these issues
changing? I don't think that this idea of mass collaboration, and
consumption, and just pushing out information is still going to be
there. It's probably only going to grow, but then do you see that the
conversation with students needs to shift in a different direction?

**Maha**:  [20:07] I do think we need to listen to them. I was, just
now, listening to a virtually connecting session. It's on YouTube. You
can find it. It's from the Digital Pedagogy Lab Institute.

[20:18] They're virtually connecting those conversations with people
who are at conferences with virtual folks. They get recorded, and
they're on YouTube. You can watch them later.

[20:25] This one had several people who were attending the event. One
of whom was a recent fresh grad from university. The conversation was
around not what we're talking about now.

[20:38] What was interesting is that the students were talking about
whether you should use platforms that extract data from students and let
them lose control over the data and things like that.

[20:49] Miranda, who's a recent grad, was saying that, for her and
many of her friends, they've already gone through a lot of the risks of
social media, like catfishing, and getting credit cards stolen, and all
that kind of thing. Their attitude towards these things are different
than us who are of an older generation.

[21:08] When we have those conversations with them about the issues
and so on, they get frustrated. Then, nothing happens, and in the end,
they're still going to use it because they need to use it for other
things. They perceive the risks differently.

[21:20] She gave the example of airport security. She said, "You can
talk about the injustice of the way airport security is and how they
search people and so on, but there's nothing you are going to do to
change it. If you want to get from one place to another, you're going to
go through airport security, so don't make me so frustrated that you
make me not want to..."

[21:39] She didn't say exactly that, but I'm thinking she's saying,
"Don't make me so frustrated that I don't want to travel when I would
have benefited a lot more from traveling than the risk I'm taking by
going through airport security."

[21:48] First of all, you need to listen to how the students feel
about it. Even though they have less experience and they're less mature
and all that, you just still need to trust that they are listening to
what you're saying and that they actually know what they're talking
about to some extent, at least.

[22:03] Those conversations will start to shift as younger people view
these things slightly differently than we do. Digital literacy isn't an
age necessarily thing, but they're younger in the sense that they grew
up with this technology in a particular way that they're less shocked by
some of the things that shock us, because we didn't grow up with it.

[22:34] I personally just believe that, a lot of times, we're being so
critical of something that has so much potential for empowerment that we
stand in the way of people who could potentially be empowered from it.

[22:49] One of the people who talks about this, not about technology
but really nicely is Freire. Freire and Shor have a book called
"Pedagogy of Liberation" where they talk about how critical pedagogy and
the ideology of it is really important.

[23:01] At the same time, you need to think about the economic benefit
to the oppressed. Even though you need to challenge the dominant
language, the dominant views, you still need to teach it to students so
that they can survive in the world while being critical of it but still
teaching them that as well.

[23:24] For social media and those kinds of things and as a digital
literacy, they need to know all the dimensions of it and then make those
decisions for themselves of whether they're going to use it or not.

[23:34] I think about something like the role of social media in
Egyptian revolution, Arab Spring, and so on. It's problematic in so many
ways that we didn't realize at the time, but it's still allowed
something to happen. It doesn't matter what happened afterwards, but
something happened because of that.

[23:51] It allowed a lot of people to come together in ways that they
couldn't have beforehand. You don't want to take away that potential. A
lot of us who are critiquing social media are people who have benefited
so much from social media that it doesn't make sense to push students
away from it completely when there's that potential and when students
are probably going to be there anyway.

[24:12] You might as well teach them how they might use it in a more
empowering way. For example, a lot of my students who learned to use
Twitter didn't know that you could use a hashtag as an entry point into
a community. They used to think hashtags are things that could say,
"\#I'm smiling now."

[24:30] Rather than a \#edtech where you would find information about
educational technology. They usually think about following Justin
Bieber, and BBC, or whatever. They don't think about following human
beings that they don't know personally, but who might have something
useful for them to listen to. They are amazed when someone responds to
them from somewhere else in the world.

**Melissa**:  [24:54] That's an amazing thing that we can help open
this world up to students, especially thinking about even just
scholarship and disciplinary studies. Or not even seems like 10 years
ago, you would have the top tier of people and scholars and academics in
a certain field.

[25:22] They seemed unreachable, because you read their articles and
journals. That was about the end of it. Now, you can actually tweet
someone about their article. It's just so much easier to have access to,
not even just in academia, but virtually any aspect of life.

[25:47] There's that ability to converse that is so beneficial for
students and all of us, but especially for students as they're starting
to navigate the world.

**Maha**:  [26:00] I agree completely. First of all, a lot of people
who are on Twitter are there because they're willing to do that. A lot
of people who aren't on Twitter aren't there because they really don't
want to be reached that way.

[26:12] That's fine, but when you're on Twitter, especially if you're
active on Twitter, it signals that you might respond to what students
sent you. Definitely, this is one of the most amazing thing is that
Twitter is because someone doesn't have to follow you back for you to be
able to converse with them. That's amazing versus Facebook, for example.

**Melissa**:  [26:29] Should we use this moment to say that we planned
this entire interview via Twitter messages?

**Maha**:  [26:35] Yes, via Twitter DM. That's true. That's actually
the best way to reach me, and my students figured that out pretty
quickly. If we use Twitter that semester, they figured that out.
[laughs]

**Melissa**:  [26:49] I do feel that the interview with you here is a
great example of this. Like I said, I have admired your work for a long
time. Then, when we were brainstorming people for the podcast, I said,
"Hey, I've got somebody that would be fantastic. Let me just send her a
message on Twitter and see what she says." I'm glad that you are
reachable and open to those sorts of things.

**Maha**:  [27:14] Thank you. I'm enjoying it because I was just
blogging about some of the things we're talking about right now. I
couldn't finish the blog post, because it was time to talk to you. You
actually helped me think through it.

**Melissa**:  [27:24] That's good because I feel like we could keep
talking for hours and hours. Maybe, we can continue our conversations
off the podcast at some point, but it's great that you have so much on
your blog. Your Twitter account is a must follow so that listeners can
find a little bit more about your ideas here and your thoughts.

[27:54] As we're wrapping up, is there anything else that you want to
say or that you want to make sure? Anything that has jumped up at you as
we've been talking today?

**Maha**:  [28:09] Like you say, the conversation doesn't need to end.
I don't know with your podcast if there's a space for people to ask
questions, or if it's put on something like SoundCloud where they can
put comments there?

**Melissa**:  [28:18] It is, yes. It'll be on SoundCloud.

**Maha**:  [28:20] That will be an easy place for people to annotate.
if they want. Of course, they can reach out to me on Twitter or my blog
or anywhere else.

**Melissa**:  [28:26] I just want to ask one more question. That is,
while we've been talking a lot about digital technologies and social
media and some of those types of things, we like to ask the guests if
you have a favorite analogue educational technology that you tend to use
in your teaching or your work with faculty.

**Maha**:  [28:53] I have a thing that I use with my students and in
faculty development workshops. It's educational, but I wouldn't call it
an educational technology. It's a toy thing that I got for my daughter,
but I use it in workshops.

[29:09] It's a thing that's magnets and balls that you can build all
kinds of shapes with. It's banned in the US because kids used to swallow
the balls or something like that. I was experimenting with my daughter
with which ones she'd like the most and which ones that I could use in
workshops.

[29:23] One of the beautiful things about it is this tactile aspect.
When a lot of what you're doing is digital, you don't get that and
having an opportunity to have students to work together to build
something with it.

[29:36] I use it for all kinds of different icebreaker activities. I
use it in all kinds of ways of making analogues between what they end up
doing and what I'm trying to talk about, which are completely different
things each time.

[29:48] That's one of my favorite things that I discovered a couple of
years ago. It's also very interesting how a lot of things that I do with
my child influence my teaching in a big way.

**Melissa**:  [29:58] How old is she?

**Maha**:  [30:00] She is going to be six next month, Chauba.

**Melissa**:  [30:03] You've got a little guinea pig at home that you
can try out some of these different things, right?

**Maha**:  [30:09] Yeah.

**Melissa**:  [30:08] That is a wonderful answer. I don't know what
those things are called. Little, metal...

**Maha**:  [30:13] The particular brand, they're called Barney Mangel
Magnets. I could send you a picture if you want to put that on the...

**Melissa**:  [30:19] We can attach it. That's perfect. That would be
great. I know it's very late in Cairo, but thank you so much again for
joining me today on the podcast. It's been a real pleasure to talk with
you.

**Maha**:  [30:33] Thank you so much, Melissa. I enjoyed it. The
interesting thing is that I said completely different things than what I
was expecting to say. I was thinking through your questions, and the way
you asked them helped me think even more. Thank you for that.

[30:47] [background music]

**Melissa**:  [30:47] I'm glad to hear it.

**Derek**:  [30:49] That was Maha Bali, Associate Professor of the
Practice at the Center For Learning and Teaching at the American
University in Cairo. Maha was interviewed by Melissa Mallon, one of my
favorite librarians. Melissa is Director of Liaison and Instruction
Services at the Vanderbilt Library, and directs the Peabody Library.
Peabody is our College of Education and Human Development.

[31:08] I really appreciated Maha's realistic and nuanced take on
educational technology. I was reminded of what Helen Shim said a couple
of episodes back. She said, "I don't think of technology as an
adversary. I don't think of it as a savior. I think it's just a
mechanism."

[31:23] I think that it's a mechanism that I want my students to think
critically about, and Maha shared several examples of engaging students
in just those kinds of conversations. Maha Bali is very active online. I
would recommend that you check out her Twitter account and her blog.
We'll have links to those in the show notes as well as links to a few
resources that Maha mentioned.

[31:40] You can find those show notes on our website,
leadinglinespod.com. We welcome your comments and questions there, and
on Twitter, where our handle is @leadinglinespod. Leading lines is
produced by the Center for Teaching, the Vanderbilt Institute for
Digital Learning, the Office of Scholarly Communications, and the
Associate Provost for Digital Learning.

[31:56] This episode was edited by Rhett McDaniel. Look for new
episodes the first and third Monday of each month.

[32:01] [background music]

**Derek**:  [32:01] I'm your host, Derek Bruff. Thanks for listening.
